(NIMH)
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
What is ADHD?
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is marked by an ongoing pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development. People with ADHD experience an ongoing pattern of the following types of symptoms:

Inattention means a person may have difficulty staying on task, sustaining focus, and staying organized, and these problems are not due to defiance or lack of comprehension.
Hyperactivity means a person may seem to move about constantly, including in situations when it is not appropriate, or excessively fidgets, taps, or talks. In adults, hyperactivity may mean extreme restlessness or talking too much.
Impulsivity means a person may act without thinking or have difficulty with self-control. Impulsivity could also include a desire for immediate rewards or the inability to delay gratification. An impulsive person may interrupt others or make important decisions without considering long-term consequences.
What are the signs and symptoms of ADHD?
Some people with ADHD mainly have symptoms of inattention. Others mostly have symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity. Some people have both types of symptoms.

Many people experience some inattention, unfocused motor activity, and impulsivity, but for people with ADHD, these behaviors:

Are more severe
Occur more often
Interfere with or reduce the quality of how they function socially, at school, or in a job
Inattention
People with symptoms of inattention may often:

Overlook or miss details and make seemingly careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during other activities
Have difficulty sustaining attention during play or tasks, such as conversations, lectures, or lengthy reading
Not seem to listen when spoken to directly
Find it hard to follow through on instructions or finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace, or may start tasks but lose focus and get easily sidetracked
Have difficulty organizing tasks and activities, doing tasks in sequence, keeping materials and belongings in order, managing time, and meeting deadlines
Avoid tasks that require sustained mental effort, such as homework, or for teens and older adults, preparing reports, completing forms, or reviewing lengthy papers
Lose things necessary for tasks or activities, such as school supplies, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, and cell phones
Be easily distracted by unrelated thoughts or stimuli
Be forgetful in daily activities, such as chores, errands, returning calls, and keeping appointments
Hyperactivity-impulsivity
People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often:

Fidget and squirm while seated
Leave their seats in situations when staying seated is expected, such as in the classroom or the office
Run, dash around, or climb at inappropriate times or, in teens and adults, often feel restless
Be unable to play or engage in hobbies quietly
Be constantly in motion or on the go, or act as if driven by a motor
Talk excessively
Answer questions before they are fully asked, finish other people’s sentences, or speak without waiting for a turn in a conversation
Have difficulty waiting one’s turn
Interrupt or intrude on others, for example in conversations, games, or activities
Primary care providers sometimes diagnose and treat ADHD. They may also refer individuals to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, who can do a thorough evaluation and make an ADHD diagnosis.

For a person to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity must be chronic or long-lasting, impair the person’s functioning, and cause the person to fall behind typical development for their age. Stress, sleep disorders, anxiety, depression, and other physical conditions or illnesses can cause similar symptoms to those of ADHD. Therefore, a thorough evaluation is necessary to determine the cause of the symptoms.

Most children with ADHD receive a diagnosis during the elementary school years. For an adolescent or adult to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms need to have been present before age 12.

ADHD symptoms can appear as early as between the ages of 3 and 6 and can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Symptoms of ADHD can be mistaken for emotional or disciplinary problems or missed entirely in children who primarily have symptoms of inattention, leading to a delay in diagnosis. Adults with undiagnosed ADHD may have a history of poor academic performance, problems at work, or difficult or failed relationships.

ADHD symptoms can change over time as a person ages. In young children with ADHD, hyperactivity-impulsivity is the most predominant symptom. As a child reaches elementary school, the symptom of inattention may become more prominent and cause the child to struggle academically. In adolescence, hyperactivity seems to lessen and symptoms may more likely include feelings of restlessness or fidgeting, but inattention and impulsivity may remain. Many adolescents with ADHD also struggle with relationships and antisocial behaviors. Inattention, restlessness, and impulsivity tend to persist into adulthood.

What are the risk factors of ADHD?
Researchers are not sure what causes ADHD, although many studies suggest that genes play a large role. Like many other disorders, ADHD probably results from a combination of factors. In addition to genetics, researchers are looking at possible environmental factors that might raise the risk of developing ADHD and are studying how brain injuries, nutrition, and social environments might play a role in ADHD.

ADHD is more common in males than females, and females with ADHD are more likely to primarily have inattention symptoms. People with ADHD often have other conditions, such as learning disabilities, anxiety disorder, conduct disorder, depression, and substance use disorder.

How is ADHD treated?
While there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments may reduce symptoms and improve functioning. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, education or training, or a combination of treatments.

Medication
For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the right one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely by their prescribing doctor.

Stimulants. The most common type of medication used for treating ADHD is called a “stimulant.” Although it may seem unusual to treat ADHD with a medication that is considered a stimulant, it works by increasing the brain chemicals dopamine and norepinephrine, which play essential roles in thinking and attention.

Under medical supervision, stimulant medications are considered safe. However, like all medications, they can have side effects, especially when misused or taken in excess of the prescribed dose, and require an individual’s health care provider to monitor how they may be reacting to the medication.

Non-stimulants. A few other ADHD medications are non-stimulants. These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant: when a person has bothersome side effects from stimulants, when a stimulant was not effective, or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness.

Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, some antidepressants are used alone or in combination with a stimulant to treat ADHD. Antidepressants may help all of the symptoms of ADHD and can be prescribed if a patient has bothersome side effects from stimulants. Antidepressants can be helpful in combination with stimulants if a patient also has another condition, such as an anxiety disorder, depression, or another mood disorder. Non-stimulant ADHD medications and antidepressants may also have side effects.

Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication, dose, or medication combination. To find the latest information about medications, talk to a health care provider and visit the FDA website .

Psychotherapy and psychosocial interventions
Several specific psychosocial interventions have been shown to help individuals with ADHD and their families manage symptoms and improve everyday functioning.

For school-age children, frustration, blame, and anger may have built up within a family before a child is diagnosed. Parents and children may need specialized help to overcome negative feelings. Mental health professionals can educate parents about ADHD and how it affects a family. They also will help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other.

All types of therapy for children and teens with ADHD require parents to play an active role. Psychotherapy that includes only individual treatment sessions with the child (without parent involvement) is not effective for managing ADHD symptoms and behavior. This type of treatment is more likely to be effective for treating symptoms of anxiety or depression that may occur along with ADHD.

Behavioral therapy is a type of psychotherapy that aims to help a person change their behavior. It might involve practical assistance, such as help organizing tasks or completing schoolwork, or working through emotionally difficult events. Behavioral therapy also teaches a person how to:

Monitor their own behavior
Give oneself praise or rewards for acting in a desired way, such as controlling anger or thinking before acting
Parents, teachers, and family members also can give feedback on certain behaviors and help establish clear rules, chore lists, and structured routines to help a person control their behavior. Therapists may also teach children social skills, such as how to wait their turn, share toys, ask for help, or respond to teasing. Learning to read facial expressions and the tone of voice in others, and how to respond appropriately can also be part of social skills training.

Cognitive behavioral therapy helps a person learn how to be aware and accepting of one’s own thoughts and feelings to improve focus and concentration. The therapist also encourages the person with ADHD to adjust to the life changes that come with treatment, such as thinking before acting, or resisting the urge to take unnecessary risks.

Family and marital therapy can help family members and spouses find productive ways to handle disruptive behaviors, encourage behavior changes, and improve interactions with the person with ADHD.

Parenting skills training (behavioral parent management training) teaches parents skills for encouraging and rewarding positive behaviors in their children. Parents are taught to use a system of rewards and consequences to change a child’s behavior, to give immediate and positive feedback for behaviors they want to encourage, and to ignore or redirect behaviors they want to discourage.

Specific behavioral classroom management interventions and/or academic accommodations for children and teens have been shown to be effective for managing symptoms and improving functioning at school and with peers. Interventions may include behavior management plans or teaching organizational or study skills. Accommodations may include preferential seating in the classroom, reduced classwork load, or extended time on tests and exams. The school may provide accommodations through what is called a 504 Plan or, for children who qualify for special education services, an Individualized Education Plan (IEP). 

To learn more about the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), visit the U.S. Department of Education’s IDEA website .

Stress management techniques can benefit parents of children with ADHD by increasing their ability to deal with frustration so that they can respond calmly to their child’s behavior.

Support groups can help parents and families connect with others who have similar problems and concerns. Groups often meet regularly to share frustrations and successes, to exchange information about recommended specialists and strategies, and to talk with experts.

The National Resource Center on ADHD, a program of Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD®) supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has information and many resources. You can reach this center online  or by phone at 1-866-200-8098.

Learn more about psychotherapy.

Tips to help kids and adults with ADHD stay organized
For kids:

Parents and teachers can help kids with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as:

Keeping a routine and a schedule. Keep the same routine every day, from wake-up time to bedtime. Include times for homework, outdoor play, and indoor activities. Keep the schedule on the refrigerator or a bulletin board. Write changes on the schedule as far in advance as possible.
Organizing everyday items. Have a place for everything, (such as clothing, backpacks, and toys), and keep everything in its place.
Using homework and notebook organizers. Use organizers for school material and supplies. Stress to your child the importance of writing down assignments and bringing home necessary books.
Being clear and consistent. Children with ADHD need consistent rules they can understand and follow.
Giving praise or rewards when rules are followed. Children with ADHD often receive and expect criticism. Look for good behavior and praise it.
For adults:

A professional counselor or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize their life with tools such as:

Keeping routines.
Making lists for different tasks and activities.
Using a calendar for scheduling events.
Using reminder notes.
Assigning a special place for keys, bills, and paperwork.
Breaking down large tasks into more manageable, smaller steps so that completing each part of the task provides a sense of accomplishment.


mayoclinic.org
Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - Symptoms and causes
Print
7–9 minutes
Overview

Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a mental health disorder that includes a combination of persistent problems, such as difficulty paying attention, hyperactivity and impulsive behavior. Adult ADHD can lead to unstable relationships, poor work or school performance, low self-esteem, and other problems.

Though it's called adult ADHD, symptoms start in early childhood and continue into adulthood. In some cases, ADHD is not recognized or diagnosed until the person is an adult. Adult ADHD symptoms may not be as clear as ADHD symptoms in children. In adults, hyperactivity may decrease, but struggles with impulsiveness, restlessness and difficulty paying attention may continue.

Treatment for adult ADHD is similar to treatment for childhood ADHD. Adult ADHD treatment includes medications, psychological counseling (psychotherapy) and treatment for any mental health conditions that occur along with ADHD.
Symptoms

Some people with ADHD have fewer symptoms as they age, but some adults continue to have major symptoms that interfere with daily functioning. In adults, the main features of ADHD may include difficulty paying attention, impulsiveness and restlessness. Symptoms can range from mild to severe.

Many adults with ADHD aren't aware they have it — they just know that everyday tasks can be a challenge. Adults with ADHD may find it difficult to focus and prioritize, leading to missed deadlines and forgotten meetings or social plans. The inability to control impulses can range from impatience waiting in line or driving in traffic to mood swings and outbursts of anger.

Adult ADHD symptoms may include:

    Impulsiveness
    Disorganization and problems prioritizing
    Poor time management skills
    Problems focusing on a task
    Trouble multitasking
    Excessive activity or restlessness
    Poor planning
    Low frustration tolerance
    Frequent mood swings
    Problems following through and completing tasks
    Hot temper
    Trouble coping with stress

What's typical behavior and what's ADHD?

Almost everyone has some symptoms similar to ADHD at some point in their lives. If your difficulties are recent or occurred only occasionally in the past, you probably don't have ADHD. ADHD is diagnosed only when symptoms are severe enough to cause ongoing problems in more than one area of your life. These persistent and disruptive symptoms can be traced back to early childhood.

Diagnosis of ADHD in adults can be difficult because certain ADHD symptoms are similar to those caused by other conditions, such as anxiety or mood disorders. And many adults with ADHD also have at least one other mental health condition, such as depression or anxiety.
When to see a doctor

If any of the symptoms listed above continually disrupt your life, talk to your doctor about whether you might have ADHD.

Different types of health care professionals may diagnose and supervise treatment for ADHD. Seek a provider who has training and experience in caring for adults with ADHD.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

While the exact cause of ADHD is not clear, research efforts continue. Factors that may be involved in the development of ADHD include:

    Genetics. ADHD can run in families, and studies indicate that genes may play a role.
    Environment. Certain environmental factors also may increase risk, such as lead exposure as a child.
    Problems during development. Problems with the central nervous system at key moments in development may play a role.

Risk factors

Risk of ADHD may increase if:

    You have blood relatives, such as a parent or sibling, with ADHD or another mental health disorder
    Your mother smoked, drank alcohol or used drugs during pregnancy
    As a child, you were exposed to environmental toxins — such as lead, found mainly in paint and pipes in older buildings
    You were born prematurely

Complications

ADHD can make life difficult for you. ADHD has been linked to:

    Poor school or work performance
    Unemployment
    Financial problems
    Trouble with the law
    Alcohol or other substance misuse
    Frequent car accidents or other accidents
    Unstable relationships
    Poor physical and mental health
    Poor self-image
    Suicide attempts

Coexisting conditions

Although ADHD doesn't cause other psychological or developmental problems, other disorders often occur along with ADHD and make treatment more challenging. These include:

    Mood disorders. Many adults with ADHD also have depression, bipolar disorder or another mood disorder. While mood problems aren't necessarily due directly to ADHD, a repeated pattern of failures and frustrations due to ADHD can worsen depression.
    Anxiety disorders. Anxiety disorders occur fairly often in adults with ADHD. Anxiety disorders may cause overwhelming worry, nervousness and other symptoms. Anxiety can be made worse by the challenges and setbacks caused by ADHD.
    Other psychiatric disorders. Adults with ADHD are at increased risk of other psychiatric disorders, such as personality disorders, intermittent explosive disorder and substance use disorders.
    Learning disabilities. Adults with ADHD may score lower on academic testing than would be expected for their age, intelligence and education. Learning disabilities can include problems with understanding and communicating.

Jan. 25, 2023
Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

    Symptoms
    &
    causes
    Diagnosis
    &
    treatment


mayoclinic.org
Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
11–13 minutes
Diagnosis

Signs and symptoms of ADHD in adults can be hard to spot. However, core symptoms start early in life — before age 12 — and continue into adulthood, creating major problems.

No single test can confirm the diagnosis. Making the diagnosis will likely include:

    Physical exam, to help rule out other possible causes for your symptoms
    Information gathering, such as asking you questions about any current medical issues, personal and family medical history, and the history of your symptoms
    ADHD rating scales or psychological tests to help collect and evaluate information about your symptoms

Other conditions that resemble ADHD

Some medical conditions or treatments may cause signs and symptoms similar to those of ADHD. Examples include:

    Mental health disorders, such as depression, anxiety, conduct disorders, learning and language deficits, or other psychiatric disorders
    Medical problems that can affect thinking or behavior, such as a developmental disorder, seizure disorder, thyroid problems, sleep disorders, brain injury or low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
    Drugs and medications, such as alcohol or other substance misuse and certain medications

Treatment

Standard treatments for ADHD in adults typically involve medication, education, skills training and psychological counseling. A combination of these is often the most effective treatment. These treatments can help manage many symptoms of ADHD, but they don't cure it. It may take some time to determine what works best for you.
Medications

Talk with your doctor about the benefits and risks of any medications.

    Stimulants, such as products that include methylphenidate or amphetamine, are typically the most commonly prescribed medications for ADHD, but other medications may be prescribed. Stimulants appear to boost and balance levels of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters.
    Other medications used to treat ADHD include the nonstimulant atomoxetine and certain antidepressants such as bupropion. Atomoxetine and antidepressants work slower than stimulants do, but these may be good options if you can't take stimulants because of health problems or if stimulants cause severe side effects.

The right medication and the right dose vary among individuals, so it may take time to find out what's right for you. Tell your doctor about any side effects.
Psychological counseling

Counseling for adult ADHD generally includes psychological counseling (psychotherapy), education about the disorder and learning skills to help you be successful.

Psychotherapy may help you:

    Improve your time management and organizational skills
    Learn how to reduce your impulsive behavior
    Develop better problem-solving skills
    Cope with past academic, work or social failures
    Improve your self-esteem
    Learn ways to improve relationships with your family, co-workers and friends
    Develop strategies for controlling your temper

Common types of psychotherapy for ADHD include:

    Cognitive behavioral therapy. This structured type of counseling teaches specific skills to manage your behavior and change negative thinking patterns into positive ones. It can help you deal with life challenges, such as school, work or relationship problems, and help address other mental health conditions, such as depression or substance misuse.
    Marital counseling and family therapy. This type of therapy can help loved ones cope with the stress of living with someone who has ADHD and learn what they can do to help. Such counseling can improve communication and problem-solving skills.

Working on relationships

If you're like many adults with ADHD, you may be unpredictable and forget appointments, miss deadlines, and make impulsive or irrational decisions. These behaviors can strain the patience of the most forgiving co-worker, friend or partner.

Therapy that focuses on these issues and ways to better monitor your behavior can be very helpful. So can classes to improve communication and develop conflict resolution and problem-solving skills. Couples therapy and classes in which family members learn more about ADHD may significantly improve your relationships.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Because ADHD is a complex disorder and each person is unique, it's hard to make recommendations for all adults who have ADHD. But some of these suggestions may help:

    Make a list of tasks to accomplish each day. Prioritize the items. Make sure you're not trying to do too much.
    Break down tasks into smaller, more manageable steps. Consider using checklists.
    Use sticky pads to write notes to yourself. Put them on the fridge, on the bathroom mirror, in the car or in other places where you'll see the reminders.
    Keep an appointment book or electronic calendar to track appointments and deadlines.
    Carry a notebook or electronic device with you so that you can note ideas or things you'll need to remember.
    Take time to set up systems to file and organize information, both on your electronic devices and for paper documents. Get in the habit of using these systems consistently.
    Follow a routine that's consistent from day to day and keep items, such as your keys and your wallet, in the same place.
    Ask for help from family members or other loved ones.

Alternative medicine

There's little research to indicate that alternative medicine treatments can reduce ADHD symptoms. However, studies indicate that mindfulness meditation may help improve mood and attention in adults who have ADHD, as well as those who don't have ADHD.

Before using alternative interventions for ADHD, talk with your doctor about risks and possible benefits.
Coping and support

While treatment can make a big difference with ADHD, taking other steps can help you understand ADHD and learn to manage it. Some resources that may help you are listed below. Ask your health care team for more advice on resources.

    Support groups. Support groups allow you to meet other people with ADHD so that you can share experiences, information and coping strategies. These groups are available in person in many communities and also online.
    Social support. Involve your spouse, close relatives and friends in your ADHD treatment. You may feel reluctant to let people know you have ADHD, but letting others know what's going on can help them understand you better and improve your relationships.
    Co-workers, supervisors and teachers. ADHD can make work and school a challenge. You may feel embarrassed telling your boss or professor that you have ADHD, but most likely he or she will be willing to make small accommodations to help you succeed. Ask for what you need to improve your performance, such as more in-depth explanations or more time on certain tasks.

Preparing for your appointment

You're likely to start by first talking to your primary care provider. Depending on the results of the initial evaluation, he or she may refer you to a specialist, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist or other mental health professional.
What you can do

To prepare for your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've had and problems they've caused, such as trouble at work, at school or in relationships.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes you've had.
    All medications you take, including any vitamins, herbs or supplements, and the dosages. Also include the amount of caffeine and alcohol you use, and whether you use recreational drugs.
    Questions to ask your doctor.

Bring any past evaluations and results of formal testing with you, if you have them.

Basic questions to ask your doctor include:

    What are the possible causes of my symptoms?
    What kinds of tests do I need?
    What treatments are available and which do you recommend?
    What are the alternatives to the primary approach that you're suggesting?
    I have these other health problems. How can I best manage these conditions together?
    Should I see a specialist such as a psychiatrist or psychologist?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    What types of side effects can I expect from the medication?
    Are there any printed materials that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask questions anytime you don't understand something.
What to expect from your doctor

Be ready to answer questions your doctor may ask, such as:

    When do you first remember having problems focusing, paying attention or sitting still?
    Have your symptoms been continuous or occasional?
    Which symptoms bother you most, and what problems do they seem to cause?
    How severe are your symptoms?
    In what settings have you noticed the symptoms: at home, at work or in other situations?
    What was your childhood like? Did you have social problems or trouble in school?
    How is your current and past academic and work performance?
    What are your sleep hours and patterns?
    What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms?
    What medications do you take?
    Do you consume caffeine?
    Do you drink alcohol or use recreational drugs?

Your doctor or mental health professional will ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your time with the doctor.

Jan. 25, 2023

mayoclinic.org
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children - Symptoms and causes
Print
9–11 minutes
Overview

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a chronic condition that affects millions of children and often continues into adulthood. ADHD includes a combination of persistent problems, such as difficulty sustaining attention, hyperactivity and impulsive behavior.

Children with ADHD may also struggle with low self-esteem, troubled relationships and poor performance in school. Symptoms sometimes lessen with age. However, some people never completely outgrow their ADHD symptoms. But they can learn strategies to be successful.

While treatment won't cure ADHD, it can help a great deal with symptoms. Treatment typically involves medications and behavioral interventions. Early diagnosis and treatment can make a big difference in outcome.
Symptoms

The primary features of ADHD include inattention and hyperactive-impulsive behavior. ADHD symptoms start before age 12, and in some children, they're noticeable as early as 3 years of age. ADHD symptoms can be mild, moderate or severe, and they may continue into adulthood.

ADHD occurs more often in males than in females, and behaviors can be different in boys and girls. For example, boys may be more hyperactive and girls may tend to be quietly inattentive.

There are three subtypes of ADHD:

    Predominantly inattentive. The majority of symptoms fall under inattention.
    Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive. The majority of symptoms are hyperactive and impulsive.
    Combined. This is a mix of inattentive symptoms and hyperactive/impulsive symptoms.

Inattention

A child who shows a pattern of inattention may often:

    Fail to pay close attention to details or make careless mistakes in schoolwork
    Have trouble staying focused in tasks or play
    Appear not to listen, even when spoken to directly
    Have difficulty following through on instructions and fail to finish schoolwork or chores
    Have trouble organizing tasks and activities
    Avoid or dislike tasks that require focused mental effort, such as homework
    Lose items needed for tasks or activities, for example, toys, school assignments, pencils
    Be easily distracted
    Forget to do some daily activities, such as forgetting to do chores

Hyperactivity and impulsivity

A child who shows a pattern of hyperactive and impulsive symptoms may often:

    Fidget with or tap his or her hands or feet, or squirm in the seat
    Have difficulty staying seated in the classroom or in other situations
    Be on the go, in constant motion
    Run around or climb in situations when it's not appropriate
    Have trouble playing or doing an activity quietly
    Talk too much
    Blurt out answers, interrupting the questioner
    Have difficulty waiting for his or her turn
    Interrupt or intrude on others' conversations, games or activities

Typical developmental behavior vs. ADHD

Most healthy children are inattentive, hyperactive or impulsive at one time or another. It's typical for preschoolers to have short attention spans and be unable to stick with one activity for long. Even in older children and teenagers, attention span often depends on the level of interest.

The same is true of hyperactivity. Young children are naturally energetic — they often are still full of energy long after they've worn their parents out. In addition, some children just naturally have a higher activity level than others do. Children should never be classified as having ADHD just because they're different from their friends or siblings.

Children who have problems in school but get along well at home or with friends are likely struggling with something other than ADHD. The same is true of children who are hyperactive or inattentive at home, but whose schoolwork and friendships remain unaffected.
When to see a doctor

If you're concerned that your child shows signs of ADHD, see your pediatrician or family doctor. Your doctor may refer you to a specialist, such as a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, psychologist, psychiatrist or pediatric neurologist, but it's important to have a medical evaluation first to check for other possible causes of your child's difficulties.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

While the exact cause of ADHD is not clear, research efforts continue. Factors that may be involved in the development of ADHD include genetics, the environment or problems with the central nervous system at key moments in development.
Risk factors

Risk factors for ADHD may include:

    Blood relatives, such as a parent or sibling, with ADHD or another mental health disorder
    Exposure to environmental toxins — such as lead, found mainly in paint and pipes in older buildings
    Maternal drug use, alcohol use or smoking during pregnancy
    Premature birth

Although sugar is a popular suspect in causing hyperactivity, there's no reliable proof of this. Many issues in childhood can lead to difficulty sustaining attention, but that's not the same as ADHD.
Complications

ADHD can make life difficult for children. Children with ADHD:

    Often struggle in the classroom, which can lead to academic failure and judgment by other children and adults
    Tend to have more accidents and injuries of all kinds than do children who don't have ADHD
    Tend to have poor self-esteem
    Are more likely to have trouble interacting with and being accepted by peers and adults
    Are at increased risk of alcohol and drug abuse and other delinquent behavior

Coexisting conditions

ADHD doesn't cause other psychological or developmental problems. However, children with ADHD are more likely than others to also have conditions such as:

    Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), generally defined as a pattern of negative, defiant and hostile behavior toward authority figures
    Conduct disorder, marked by antisocial behavior such as stealing, fighting, destroying property, and harming people or animals
    Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, characterized by irritability and problems tolerating frustration
    Learning disabilities, including problems with reading, writing, understanding and communicating
    Substance use disorders, including drugs, alcohol and smoking
    Anxiety disorders, which may cause overwhelming worry and nervousness, and include obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
    Mood disorders, including depression and bipolar disorder, which includes depression as well as manic behavior
    Autism spectrum disorder, a condition related to brain development that impacts how a person perceives and socializes with others
    Tic disorder or Tourette syndrome, disorders that involve repetitive movements or unwanted sounds (tics) that can't be easily controlled

Prevention

To help reduce your child's risk of ADHD:

    During pregnancy, avoid anything that could harm fetal development. For example, don't drink alcohol, use recreational drugs or smoke cigarettes.
    Protect your child from exposure to pollutants and toxins, including cigarette smoke and lead paint.
    Limit screen time. Although still unproved, it may be prudent for children to avoid excessive exposure to TV and video games in the first five years of life.


mayoclinic.org
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
20–25 minutes
Diagnosis

In general, a child shouldn't receive a diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder unless the core symptoms of ADHD start early in life — before age 12 — and create significant problems at home and at school on an ongoing basis.

There's no specific test for ADHD, but making a diagnosis will likely include:

    Medical exam, to help rule out other possible causes of symptoms
    Information gathering, such as any current medical issues, personal and family medical history, and school records
    Interviews or questionnaires for family members, your child's teachers or other people who know your child well, such as caregivers, babysitters and coaches
    ADHD criteria from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-5, published by the American Psychiatric Association
    ADHD rating scales to help collect and evaluate information about your child

Diagnosing ADHD in young children

Although signs of ADHD can sometimes appear in preschoolers or even younger children, diagnosing the disorder in very young children is difficult. That's because developmental problems such as language delays can be mistaken for ADHD.

So children preschool age or younger suspected of having ADHD are more likely to need evaluation by a specialist, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist, speech pathologist, or developmental pediatrician.
Other conditions that resemble ADHD

A number of medical conditions or their treatments may cause signs and symptoms similar to those of ADHD. Examples include:

    Learning or language problems
    Mood disorders such as depression or anxiety
    Seizure disorders
    Vision or hearing problems
    Autism spectrum disorder
    Medical problems or medications that affect thinking or behavior
    Sleep disorders
    Brain injury

Treatment

Standard treatments for ADHD in children include medications, behavior therapy, counseling and education services. These treatments can relieve many of the symptoms of ADHD, but they don't cure it. It may take some time to determine what works best for your child.
Stimulant medications

Currently, stimulant drugs (psychostimulants) are the most commonly prescribed medications for ADHD. Stimulants appear to boost and balance levels of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters. These medications help improve the signs and symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity — sometimes effectively in a short period of time.

Examples include:

    Amphetamines. These include dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), dextroamphetamine-amphetamine (Adderall XR, Mydayis) and lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse).
    Methylphenidates. These include methylphenidate (Concerta, Ritalin, others) and dexmethylphenidate (Focalin).

Stimulant drugs are available in short-acting and long-acting forms. A long-acting patch of methylphenidate (Daytrana) is available that can be worn on the hip.

The right dose varies from child to child, so it may take some time to find the correct dose. And the dose may need to be adjusted if significant side effects occur or as your child matures. Ask your doctor about possible side effects of stimulants.
Stimulant medications and certain health risks

Some research indicates that using ADHD stimulant medications with certain heart problems may be a concern, and the risk of certain psychiatric symptoms may be increased when using stimulant medications.

    Heart problems. Stimulant medication may cause an increased blood pressure or heart rate, but the increased risk of serious adverse effects or sudden death is still unproved. However, the doctor should evaluate your child for any heart condition or family history of heart disease before prescribing a stimulant medication and monitor your child during stimulant use.
    Psychiatric problems. Stimulant medications may rarely increase the risk for agitation or psychotic or manic symptoms with stimulant medications use. Contact the doctor immediately if your child has sudden new or worsening behavior or sees or hears things that aren't real while taking stimulant medication.

Other medications

Other medications that may be effective in treating ADHD include:

    Atomoxetine (Strattera)
    Antidepressants such as bupropion (Wellbutrin SR, Wellbutrin XL, others)
    Guanfacine (Intuniv)
    Clonidine (Catapres, Kapvay)

Atomoxetine and antidepressants work slower than stimulants do and may take several weeks before they take full effect. These may be good options if your child can't take stimulants because of health problems or if stimulants cause severe side effects.
Suicide risk

Although it remains unproved, concerns have been raised that there may be a slightly increased risk of suicidal thinking in children and teenagers taking nonstimulant ADHD medication or antidepressants. Contact your child's doctor if you notice any signs of suicidal thinking or other signs of depression.
Giving medications safely

It's very important to make sure your child takes the right amount of the prescribed medication. Parents may be concerned about stimulants and the risk of abuse and addiction. Stimulant medications are considered safe when your child takes the medication as prescribed by the doctor. Your child should see the doctor regularly to determine if the medication needs to be adjusted.

On the other hand, there's concern that other people might misuse or abuse stimulant medication prescribed for children and teenagers with ADHD. To keep your child's medications safe and to make sure your child is getting the right dose at the right time:

    Give medications carefully. Children and teens shouldn't be in charge of their own ADHD medication without proper supervision.
    At home, keep medication locked in a childproof container. And store medication away from the reach of children. An overdose of stimulant drugs is serious and potentially fatal.
    Don't send supplies of medication to school with your child. Deliver any medication yourself to the school nurse or health office.

ADHD behavior therapy

Children with ADHD often benefit from behavior therapy, social skills training, parent skills training and counseling, which may be provided by a psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker or other mental health professional. Some children with ADHD may also have other conditions such as an anxiety disorder or depression. In these cases, counseling may help both ADHD and the coexisting problem.

Examples of therapy include:

    Behavior therapy. Teachers and parents can learn behavior-changing strategies, such as token reward systems and timeouts, for dealing with difficult situations.
    Social skills training. This can help children learn appropriate social behaviors.
    Parenting skills training. This can help parents develop ways to understand and guide their child's behavior.
    Psychotherapy. This allows older children with ADHD to talk about issues that bother them, explore negative behavior patterns and learn ways to deal with their symptoms.
    Family therapy. Family therapy can help parents and siblings deal with the stress of living with someone who has ADHD.

The best results occur when a team approach is used, with teachers, parents, therapists and physicians working together. Educate yourself about ADHD and available services. Work with your child's teachers and refer them to reliable sources of information to support their efforts in the classroom.
New medical device

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a new medical device to treat children with ADHD who are 7 to 12 years old and not taking ADHD prescription medicine. Only available by prescription, it's called the Monarch external Trigeminal Nerve Stimulation (eTNS) System.

About the size of a cell phone, the eTNS device can be used at home under parental supervision, when the child is sleeping. The device generates low-level electrical stimulation which moves through a wire to a small patch placed on the child's forehead, sending signals to areas of the brain related to attention, emotion and behavior.

If eTNS is being considered, it's important to discuss precautions, expectations and possible side effects. Get complete information and instructions from your health care professional.
Ongoing treatment

If your child is being treated for ADHD, he or she should see the doctor regularly until symptoms have largely improved, and then typically every three to six months if symptoms are stable.

Call the doctor if your child has any medication side effects, such as loss of appetite, trouble sleeping or increased irritability, or if your child's ADHD symptoms have not shown much improvement with initial treatment.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Because ADHD is complex and each person with ADHD is unique, it's hard to make recommendations that work for every child. But some of the following suggestions may help create an environment in which your child can succeed.
Children at home

    Show your child lots of affection. Children need to hear that they're loved and appreciated. Focusing only on the negative aspects of your child's behavior can harm your relationship and affect self-confidence and self-esteem. If your child has a hard time accepting verbal signs of affection, a smile, a pat on the shoulder or a hug can show you care. Look for behaviors for which you can compliment your child regularly.
    Find ways to improve self-esteem. Children with ADHD often do well with art projects, music or dance lessons, or martial arts classes. Choose activities based on their interests and abilities. All children have special talents and interests that can be fostered. Small frequent successes help build self-esteem.
    Use simple words and demonstrate when giving your child directions. Speak slowly and quietly and be very specific and concrete. Give one direction at a time. Stop and make eye contact with your child before and while you're giving directions.
    Identify difficult situations. Try to avoid situations that are difficult for your child, such as sitting through long presentations or shopping in malls and stores where the array of merchandise can be overwhelming.
    Use timeouts or appropriate consequences for discipline. Start with firm, loving discipline that rewards good behavior and discourages negative behavior. Timeouts should be relatively brief, but long enough for your child to regain control. The idea is to interrupt and defuse out-of-control behavior. Children can also be expected to accept the results of the choices they make.
    Work on organization. Help your child organize and maintain a daily assignment and activities notebook or chart and be sure your child has a quiet place to study. Group objects in the child's room and store them in clearly marked spaces. Try to help your child keep his or her environment organized and uncluttered.
    Try to keep a regular schedule for meals, naps and bedtime. Children with ADHD have a hard time accepting and adjusting to change. Use a big calendar to mark special activities that will be coming up and everyday chores. Avoid or at least warn children of sudden transitions from one activity to another.
    Encourage social interaction. Help your child learn social skills by modeling, recognizing and rewarding positive interactions with peers.
    Adopt healthy lifestyle habits. Make sure your child is rested. Try to keep your child from becoming overtired because fatigue often makes ADHD symptoms worse. It's important that your child eat a balanced diet for healthy development. In addition to its health benefits, regular exercise may have a positive effect on behavior when added to treatment.

Children in school

Learn all you can about ADHD and opportunities that are available to help your child be successful. You are your child's best advocate.

    Ask about school programs. Schools are required by law to have a program to make sure children who have a disability that interferes with learning get the support they need. Your child may be eligible for additional services offered under federal laws: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). These can include evaluation, curriculum adjustments, changes in classroom setup, modified teaching techniques, study skills instruction, use of computers, and increased collaboration between parents and teachers.
    Talk to your child's teachers. Stay in close communication with teachers and support their efforts to help your child in the classroom. Be sure teachers closely monitor your child's work, provide positive feedback, and are flexible and patient. Ask that they be very clear about their instructions and expectations.

Alternative medicine

There's little research that indicates that alternative medicine treatments can reduce ADHD symptoms. Before considering any alternative interventions, talk with your doctor to determine if the therapy is safe. Some alternative medicine treatments that have been tried, but are not yet fully proved scientifically, include:

    Yoga or meditation. Doing regular yoga routines or meditation and relaxation techniques may help children relax and learn discipline, which may help them manage their symptoms of ADHD.
    Special diets. Most diets promoted for ADHD involve eliminating foods thought to increase hyperactivity, such as sugar, and common allergens, such as wheat, milk and eggs. Some diets recommend avoiding artificial food colorings and additives. So far, studies haven't found a consistent link between diet and improved symptoms of ADHD, though some anecdotal evidence suggests diet changes might make a difference in children with specific food sensitivities. Caffeine use as a stimulant for children with ADHD can have risky effects and is not recommended.
    Vitamin or mineral supplements. While certain vitamins and minerals from foods are necessary for good health, there's no evidence that supplemental vitamins or minerals can reduce symptoms of ADHD. "Megadoses" of vitamins — doses that far exceed the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) — can be harmful.
    Herbal supplements. There is no evidence to suggest that herbal remedies help with ADHD, and some may be harmful.
    Proprietary formulations. These are products made from vitamins, micronutrients and other ingredients that are sold as possible treatment supplements for children with ADHD. These products have had little or no research and are exempt from Food and Drug Administration oversight, making them possibly ineffective or potentially harmful.
    Essential fatty acids. These fats, which include omega-3 oils, are necessary for the brain to function properly. Researchers are still investigating whether these may improve ADHD symptoms.
    Neurofeedback training. Also called electroencephalographic (EEG) biofeedback, in these sessions a child focuses on certain tasks while using a machine that shows brain wave patterns. More research is needed to see if this works.

Coping and support

Caring for a child with ADHD can be challenging for the whole family. Parents may be hurt by their child's behavior, as well as by the way other people respond to it. The stress of dealing with ADHD can lead to marital conflict. These problems may be compounded by the financial burden that ADHD can place on families.

Siblings of a child with ADHD also may have special difficulties. They can be affected by a brother or sister who is demanding or aggressive, and they may also receive less attention because the child with ADHD requires so much of a parent's time.
Resources

Many resources are available, such as social services or support groups. Support groups often can provide helpful information about coping with ADHD. Ask your child's doctor if he or she knows of any support groups in your area.

There also are excellent books and guides for both parents and teachers, and internet sites dealing exclusively with ADHD. But be careful of websites or other resources that focus on risky or unproved remedies or those that conflict with your health care team's recommendations.
Strategies for coping

Many parents notice patterns in their child's behavior as well as in their own responses to that behavior. Both you and your child may need to change behavior. But substituting new habits for old ones takes a lot of hard work.

Be realistic in your expectations for improvement — both your own and your child's. And keep your child's developmental stage in mind. Set small goals for both yourself and your child and don't try to make a lot of changes all at once.

    Stay calm and set a good example. Act the way you want your child to act. Try to remain patient and in control — even when your child is out of control. If you speak quietly and calmly, your child is more likely to calm down too. Learning stress management techniques can help you deal with your own frustrations.
    Take time to enjoy your child. Make an effort to accept and appreciate the parts of your child's personality that aren't so difficult. One of the best ways to do this is simply to spend time together. This should be a time without the distraction of other children or adults. Try to give your child more positive than negative attention every day.
    Strive for healthy family relationships. The relationship among all family members plays a big part in managing or changing the behavior of a child with ADHD. Couples with a strong bond often find it easier to face parenting challenges than those whose bond isn't as strong. It's important for partners to take time to nurture their own relationship.
    Give yourself a break. Give yourself a break now and then. Don't feel guilty for spending a few hours apart from your child. You'll be a better parent if you're rested and relaxed. Don't hesitate to ask relatives and friends for help. Make sure that babysitters or other caretakers are knowledgeable about ADHD and mature enough for the task.

Preparing for your appointment

You're likely to start by taking your child to a family doctor or pediatrician. Depending on the results of the initial evaluation, your doctor may refer you to a specialist, such as a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, psychologist, psychiatrist or pediatric neurologist.
What you can do

To prepare for your child's appointment:

    Make a list of any symptoms and difficulties your child has at home or at school.
    Prepare key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    Make a list of all medications, vitamins, herbs or other supplements that your child is taking and the dosages.
    Bring any past evaluations and results of formal testing, if you have them, and school report cards.
    Make a list of questions to ask your child's doctor.

Questions to ask your child's doctor may include:

    Other than ADHD, what are possible causes for my child's symptoms?
    What kinds of tests does my child need?
    What treatments are available, and which do you recommend?
    What are the alternatives to the primary approach that you're suggesting?
    My child has other health problems. How can I best manage these conditions together?
    Should my child see a specialist?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing for my child?
    What types of side effects can we expect from the medication?
    Are there any printed materials that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask questions anytime you don't understand something.
What to expect from your doctor

Be ready to answer questions your doctor may ask, such as:

    When did you first notice your child's behavior issues?
    Do the troubling behaviors occur all the time or only in certain situations?
    How severe are your child's difficulties at home and at school?
    What, if anything, appears to worsen your child's behavior?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your child's behavior?
    Does your child consume caffeine? How much?
    What are your child's sleep hours and patterns?
    How is your child's current and past academic performance?
    Does your child read at home? Does he or she have trouble reading?
    What discipline methods have you used at home? Which ones are effective?
    Describe who lives at home and a typical daily routine.
    Describe your child's social relationships at home and at school.

Your doctor or mental health professional will ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your time with the doctor.
