NIMH
Anxiety Disorders
What is anxiety?
Occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. Many people worry about things such as health, money, or family problems. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For people with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships.

There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.

What are the signs and symptoms of anxiety?
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) usually involves a persistent feeling of anxiety or dread, which can interfere with daily life. It is not the same as occasionally worrying about things or experiencing anxiety due to stressful life events. People living with GAD experience frequent anxiety for months, if not years.

Symptoms of GAD include:

Feeling restless, wound-up, or on-edge
Being easily fatigued
Having difficulty concentrating
Being irritable
Having headaches, muscle aches, stomachaches, or unexplained pains
Difficulty controlling feelings of worry
Having sleep problems, such as difficulty falling or staying asleep
Panic disorder
People with panic disorder have frequent and unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear, discomfort, or sense of losing control even when there is no clear danger or trigger. Not everyone who experiences a panic attack will develop panic disorder.

During a panic attack, a person may experience:

Pounding or racing heart
Sweating
Trembling or tingling
Chest pain
Feelings of impending doom
Feelings of being out of control
People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Panic attacks can occur as frequently as several times a day or as rarely as a few times a year.

Social anxiety disorder
Social anxiety disorder is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others. For people with social anxiety disorder, the fear of social situations may feel so intense that it seems beyond their control. For some people, this fear may get in the way of going to work, attending school, or doing everyday things.

People with social anxiety disorder may experience:

Blushing, sweating, or trembling
Pounding or racing heart
Stomachaches
Rigid body posture or speaking with an overly soft voice
Difficulty making eye contact or being around people they don’t know
Feelings of self-consciousness or fear that people will judge them negatively
Phobia-related disorders
A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.

People with a phobia:

May have an irrational or excessive worry about encountering the feared object or situation
Take active steps to avoid the feared object or situation
Experience immediate intense anxiety upon encountering the feared object or situation
Endure unavoidable objects and situations with intense anxiety
There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:

Specific phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:

Flying
Heights
Specific animals, such as spiders, dogs, or snakes
Receiving injections
Blood
Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.

Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:

Using public transportation
Being in open spaces
Being in enclosed spaces
Standing in line or being in a crowd
Being outside of the home alone
People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.

Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with. However, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People with separation anxiety disorder fear being away from the people they are close to. They often worry that something bad might happen to their loved ones while they are not together. This fear makes them avoid being alone or away from their loved ones. They may have bad dreams about being separated or feel unwell when separation is about to happen.

Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.

What are the risk factors for anxiety?
Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder.

The risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder vary. However, some general risk factors include:

Shyness or feeling distressed or nervous in new situations in childhood
Exposure to stressful and negative life or environmental events
A history of anxiety or other mental disorders in biological relatives
Anxiety symptoms can be produced or aggravated by:

Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or heart arrhythmia
Caffeine or other substances/medications
If you think you may have an anxiety disorder, getting a physical examination from a health care provider may help them diagnose your symptoms and find the right treatment.

How is anxiety treated?
Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety, and you should work with a health care provider to choose the best treatment for you.

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at your specific anxieties and tailored to your needs.

Cognitive behavioral therapy

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to situations to help you feel less anxious and fearful. CBT has been well studied and is the gold standard for psychotherapy.

Exposure therapy is a CBT method that is used to treat anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises.

Acceptance and commitment therapy

Another treatment option for some anxiety disorders is acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). ACT takes a different approach than CBT to negative thoughts. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety. Compared to CBT, ACT is a newer form of psychotherapy treatment, so less data are available on its effectiveness.

Medication
Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Health care providers, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider, can prescribe medication for anxiety. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are antidepressants, anti-anxiety medications (such as benzodiazepines), and beta-blockers.

Antidepressants

Antidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects.

Antidepressants can take several weeks to start working so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a health care provider. Your provider can help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.

In some cases, children, teenagers, and adults younger than 25 may experience increased suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, people of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

Anti-anxiety medications

Anti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.

Benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications. However, some people build up a tolerance to these medications and need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people even become dependent on them.

To avoid these problems, health care providers usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time.

If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. Your provider can help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.

Beta-blockers

Although beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications can help people keep physical symptoms under control when taken for short periods. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including to prevent some predictable forms of performance anxieties.

Choosing the right medication

Some types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with a health care provider to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. People should talk with a health care provider, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.

Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your and your provider may try several medicines before finding the right one.

Support groups
Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Support groups are available both in person and online. However, any advice you receive from a support group member should be used cautiously and does not replace treatment recommendations from a health care provider.

Stress management techniques
Stress management techniques, such as exercise, mindfulness, and meditation, also can reduce anxiety symptoms and enhance the effects of psychotherapy. You can learn more about how these techniques benefit your treatment by talking with a health care provider.


mayoclinic.org
Generalized anxiety disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
8–10 minutes
Overview

It's normal to feel anxious from time to time, especially if your life is stressful. However, excessive, ongoing anxiety and worry that are difficult to control and interfere with day-to-day activities may be a sign of generalized anxiety disorder.

It's possible to develop generalized anxiety disorder as a child or an adult. Generalized anxiety disorder has symptoms that are similar to panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and other types of anxiety, but they're all different conditions.

Living with generalized anxiety disorder can be a long-term challenge. In many cases, it occurs along with other anxiety or mood disorders. In most cases, generalized anxiety disorder improves with psychotherapy or medications. Making lifestyle changes, learning coping skills and using relaxation techniques also can help.
Symptoms

Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms can vary. They may include:

    Persistent worrying or anxiety about a number of areas that are out of proportion to the impact of the events
    Overthinking plans and solutions to all possible worst-case outcomes
    Perceiving situations and events as threatening, even when they aren't
    Difficulty handling uncertainty
    Indecisiveness and fear of making the wrong decision
    Inability to set aside or let go of a worry
    Inability to relax, feeling restless, and feeling keyed up or on edge
    Difficulty concentrating, or the feeling that your mind "goes blank"

Physical signs and symptoms may include:

    Fatigue
    Trouble sleeping
    Muscle tension or muscle aches
    Trembling, feeling twitchy
    Nervousness or being easily startled
    Sweating
    Nausea, diarrhea or irritable bowel syndrome
    Irritability

There may be times when your worries don't completely consume you, but you still feel anxious even when there's no apparent reason. For example, you may feel intense worry about your safety or that of your loved ones, or you may have a general sense that something bad is about to happen.

Your anxiety, worry or physical symptoms cause you significant distress in social, work or other areas of your life. Worries can shift from one concern to another and may change with time and age.
Symptoms in children and teenagers

Children and teenagers may have similar worries to adults, but also may have excessive worries about:

    Performance at school or sporting events
    Family members' safety
    Being on time (punctuality)
    Earthquakes, nuclear war or other catastrophic events

A child or teen with excessive worry may:

    Feel overly anxious to fit in
    Be a perfectionist
    Redo tasks because they aren't perfect the first time
    Spend excessive time doing homework
    Lack confidence
    Strive for approval
    Require a lot of reassurance about performance
    Have frequent stomachaches or other physical complaints
    Avoid going to school or avoid social situations

When to see a doctor

Some anxiety is normal, but see your doctor if:

    You feel like you're worrying too much, and it's interfering with your work, relationships or other parts of your life
    You feel depressed or irritable, have trouble with drinking or drugs, or you have other mental health concerns along with anxiety
    You have suicidal thoughts or behaviors — seek emergency treatment immediately

Your worries are unlikely to simply go away on their own, and they may actually get worse over time. Try to seek professional help before your anxiety becomes severe — it may be easier to treat early on.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

As with many mental health conditions, the cause of generalized anxiety disorder likely arises from a complex interaction of biological and environmental factors, which may include:

    Differences in brain chemistry and function
    Genetics
    Differences in the way threats are perceived
    Development and personality

Risk factors

Women are diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder somewhat more often than men are. The following factors may increase the risk of developing generalized anxiety disorder:

    Personality. A person whose temperament is timid or negative or who avoids anything dangerous may be more prone to generalized anxiety disorder than others are.
    Genetics. Generalized anxiety disorder may run in families.
    Experiences. People with generalized anxiety disorder may have a history of significant life changes, traumatic or negative experiences during childhood, or a recent traumatic or negative event. Chronic medical illnesses or other mental health disorders may increase risk.

Complications

Having generalized anxiety disorder can be disabling. It can:

    Impair your ability to perform tasks quickly and efficiently because you have trouble concentrating
    Take your time and focus from other activities
    Sap your energy
    Increase your risk of depression

Generalized anxiety disorder can also lead to or worsen other physical health conditions, such as:

    Digestive or bowel problems, such as irritable bowel syndrome or ulcers
    Headaches and migraines
    Chronic pain and illness
    Sleep problems and insomnia
    Heart-health issues

Generalized anxiety disorder often occurs along with other mental health problems, which can make diagnosis and treatment more challenging. Some mental health disorders that commonly occur with generalized anxiety disorder include:

    Phobias
    Panic disorder
    Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
    Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
    Depression
    Suicidal thoughts or suicide
    Substance abuse

Prevention

There's no way to predict for certain what will cause someone to develop generalized anxiety disorder, but you can take steps to reduce the impact of symptoms if you experience anxiety:

    Get help early. Anxiety, like many other mental health conditions, can be harder to treat if you wait.
    Keep a journal. Keeping track of your personal life can help you and your mental health professional identify what's causing you stress and what seems to help you feel better.
    Prioritize issues in your life. You can reduce anxiety by carefully managing your time and energy.
    Avoid unhealthy substance use. Alcohol and drug use and even nicotine or caffeine use can cause or worsen anxiety. If you're addicted to any of these substances, quitting can make you anxious. If you can't quit on your own, see your doctor or find a treatment program or support group to help you.

Oct. 13, 2017

mayoclinic.org
Generalized anxiety disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
9–12 minutes
Diagnosis

To help diagnose generalized anxiety disorder, your doctor or mental health professional may:

    Do a physical exam to look for signs that your anxiety might be linked to medications or an underlying medical condition
    Order blood or urine tests or other tests, if a medical condition is suspected
    Ask detailed questions about your symptoms and medical history
    Use psychological questionnaires to help determine a diagnosis
    Use the criteria listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association

Treatment

Treatment decisions are based on how significantly generalized anxiety disorder is affecting your ability to function in your daily life. The two main treatments for generalized anxiety disorder are psychotherapy and medications. You may benefit most from a combination of the two. It may take some trial and error to discover which treatments work best for you.
Psychotherapy

Also known as talk therapy or psychological counseling, psychotherapy involves working with a therapist to reduce your anxiety symptoms. Cognitive behavioral therapy is the most effective form of psychotherapy for generalized anxiety disorder.

Generally a short-term treatment, cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on teaching you specific skills to directly manage your worries and help you gradually return to the activities you've avoided because of anxiety. Through this process, your symptoms improve as you build on your initial success.
Medications

Several types of medications are used to treat generalized anxiety disorder, including those below. Talk with your doctor about benefits, risks and possible side effects.

    Antidepressants. Antidepressants, including medications in the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) classes, are the first line medication treatments. Examples of antidepressants used to treat generalized anxiety disorder include escitalopram (Lexapro), duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor XR) and paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva). Your doctor also may recommend other antidepressants.
    Buspirone. An anti-anxiety medication called buspirone may be used on an ongoing basis. As with most antidepressants, it typically takes up to several weeks to become fully effective.
    Benzodiazepines. In limited circumstances, your doctor may prescribe a benzodiazepine for relief of anxiety symptoms. These sedatives are generally used only for relieving acute anxiety on a short-term basis. Because they can be habit-forming, these medications aren't a good choice if you have or had problems with alcohol or drug abuse.

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Lifestyle and home remedies

While most people with anxiety disorders need psychotherapy or medications to get anxiety under control, lifestyle changes also can make a difference. Here's what you can do:

    Keep physically active. Develop a routine so that you're physically active most days of the week. Exercise is a powerful stress reducer. It may improve your mood and help you stay healthy. Start out slowly and gradually increase the amount and intensity of your activities.
    Make sleep a priority. Do what you can to make sure you're getting enough sleep to feel rested. If you aren't sleeping well, see your doctor.
    Use relaxation techniques. Visualization techniques, meditation and yoga are examples of relaxation techniques that can ease anxiety.
    Eat healthy. Healthy eating — such as focusing on vegetables, fruits, whole grains and fish — may be linked to reduced anxiety, but more research is needed.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. These substances can worsen anxiety.
    Quit smoking and cut back or quit drinking coffee. Both nicotine and caffeine can worsen anxiety.

Alternative medicine

Several herbal remedies have been studied as treatments for anxiety. Results tend to be mixed, and in several studies people report no benefits from their use. More research is needed to fully understand the risks and benefits.

Some herbal supplements, such as kava and valerian, increase the risk of serious liver damage. Other supplements, such as passionflower or theanine, may have a calming effect, but they're often combined with other products so it's hard to tell whether they help with symptoms of anxiety.

Before taking any herbal remedies or supplements, talk with your doctor to make sure they're safe and won't interact with any medications you take.
Coping and support

To cope with generalized anxiety disorder, here's what you can do:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Take medications as directed. Keep therapy appointments. Practice the skills you learn in psychotherapy. Consistency can make a big difference, especially when it comes to taking your medication.
    Take action. Work with your mental health professional to figure out what's making you anxious and address it.
    Let it go. Don't dwell on past concerns. Change what you can in the present moment and let the rest take its course.
    Break the cycle. When you feel anxious, take a brisk walk or delve into a hobby to refocus your mind away from your worries.
    Socialize. Don't let worries isolate you from loved ones or enjoyable activities. Social interaction and caring relationships can lessen your worries.
    Join a support group for people with anxiety. Here, you can find compassion, understanding and shared experiences. You may find support groups in your community or on the internet, for example, the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI).

Preparing for your appointment

You may see your primary care doctor, or your doctor may refer you to a mental health professional. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've been experiencing, including when they occur, what seems to make them better or worse, and how much they affect your day-to-day activities, such as work, school or relationships
    Key personal information, including major life changes or stressful events you've dealt with recently and any traumatic experiences you've had in the past
    Medical information, including other physical or mental health conditions with which you've been diagnosed
    Any medications, vitamins, herbs or other supplements you're taking, including the dosages
    Questions to ask your doctor or mental health professional

Some questions to ask your doctor may include:

    What's the most likely cause of my symptoms?
    Are there other possible issues or physical health problems that could be causing or worsening my anxiety?
    Do I need any tests?
    What treatment do you recommend?
    Should I see a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional?
    Would medication help? If so, is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor or mental health professional will likely ask you a number of questions. Be ready to answer them to reserve time to go over any points you want to focus on. Questions may include:

    What are your symptoms?
    What things do you tend to worry about?
    Do your symptoms interfere with your daily activities?
    Do you avoid anything because of your anxiety?
    Have your feelings of anxiety been occasional or continuous?
    When did you first begin noticing your anxiety?
    Does anything in particular seem to trigger your anxiety or make it worse?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your feelings of anxiety?
    What, if any, physical or mental health conditions do you have?
    What traumatic experiences have you had recently or in the past?
    Do you regularly drink alcohol or use recreational drugs?
    Do you have any blood relatives with anxiety or other mental health conditions, such as depression?

Oct. 13, 2017

mayoclinic.org
Illness anxiety disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
6–7 minutes
Overview
Related links
Somatic symptom disorder

Illness anxiety disorder, sometimes called hypochondriasis or health anxiety, is worrying excessively that you are or may become seriously ill. You may have no physical symptoms. Or you may believe that normal body sensations or minor symptoms are signs of severe illness, even though a thorough medical exam doesn't reveal a serious medical condition.

You may experience extreme anxiety that body sensations, such as muscle twitching or fatigue, are associated with a specific, serious illness. This excessive anxiety — rather than the physical symptom itself — results in severe distress that can disrupt your life.

Illness anxiety disorder is a long-term condition that can fluctuate in severity. It may increase with age or during times of stress. But psychological counseling (psychotherapy) and sometimes medication can help ease your worries.
Hypochondria

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association, no longer includes hypochondriasis — also called hypochondria — as a diagnosis. Instead, people previously diagnosed with hypochondriasis may be diagnosed as having illness anxiety disorder, in which the focus of the fear and worry is on uncomfortable or unusual physical sensations being an indication of a serious medical condition.

On the other hand, somatic symptom disorder — a related disorder — involves focusing on the disabling nature of physical symptoms, such as pain or dizziness, without the worry that these symptoms represent a specific illness.
Symptoms

Symptoms of illness anxiety disorder involve preoccupation with the idea that you're seriously ill, based on normal body sensations (such as a noisy stomach) or minor signs (such as a minor rash). Signs and symptoms may include:

    Being preoccupied with having or getting a serious disease or health condition
    Worrying that minor symptoms or body sensations mean you have a serious illness
    Being easily alarmed about your health status
    Finding little or no reassurance from doctor visits or negative test results
    Worrying excessively about a specific medical condition or your risk of developing a medical condition because it runs in your family
    Having so much distress about possible illnesses that it's hard for you to function
    Repeatedly checking your body for signs of illness or disease
    Frequently making medical appointments for reassurance — or avoiding medical care for fear of being diagnosed with a serious illness
    Avoiding people, places or activities for fear of health risks
    Constantly talking about your health and possible illnesses
    Frequently searching the internet for causes of symptoms or possible illnesses

When to see a doctor

Because symptoms can be related to health problems, it's important to be evaluated by your primary care provider if this hasn't already been done. If your provider believes that you may have illness anxiety disorder, he or she may refer you to a mental health professional.
Caring for a loved one

Significant health anxiety can cause real distress for the person, and reassurance isn't always helpful. Sometimes, providing reassurance can make things worse. This can be frustrating and cause stress on families and relationships. Encourage your loved one to consider a mental health referral to learn ways to cope with illness anxiety disorder.
Causes

The exact cause of illness anxiety disorder isn't clear, but these factors may play a role:

    Beliefs. You may have a difficult time tolerating uncertainty over uncomfortable or unusual body sensations. This could lead you to misinterpret that all body sensations are serious, so you search for evidence to confirm that you have a serious disease.
    Family. You may be more likely to have health anxiety if you had parents who worried too much about their own health or your health.
    Past experience. You may have had experience with serious illness in childhood, so physical sensations may be frightening to you.

Risk factors

Illness anxiety disorder usually begins in early or middle adulthood and may get worse with age. Often for older individuals, health-related anxiety may focus on the fear of losing their memory.

Risk factors for illness anxiety disorder may include:

    A time of major life stress
    Threat of a serious illness that turns out not to be serious
    History of abuse as a child
    A serious childhood illness or a parent with a serious illness
    Personality traits, such as having a tendency toward being a worrier
    Excessive health-related internet use

Complications

Illness anxiety disorder may be associated with:

    Relationship or family problems because excessive worrying can frustrate others
    Work-related performance problems or excessive absences
    Problems functioning in daily life, possibly even resulting in disability
    Financial problems due to excessive health care visits and medical bills
    Having another mental health disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, other anxiety disorders, depression or a personality disorder

Prevention

Little is known about how to prevent illness anxiety disorder, but these suggestions may help.

    If you have problems with anxiety, seek professional advice as soon as possible to help stop symptoms from getting worse and impairing your quality of life.
    Learn to recognize when you're stressed and how this affects your body — and regularly practice stress management and relaxation techniques.
    Stick with your treatment plan to help prevent relapses or worsening of symptoms.


mayoclinic.org
Illness anxiety disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
7–8 minutes
Diagnosis

To determine a diagnosis, you'll likely have a physical exam and any tests your primary care provider recommends. Your provider can help determine if you have any medical conditions that require treatment and set limits on lab testing, imaging and referrals to specialists.

Your primary care provider may also refer you to a mental health professional. He or she may:

    Conduct a psychological evaluation to talk about your symptoms, stressful situations, family history, fears or concerns, and ways that your anxiety is negatively affecting your life
    Have you fill out a psychological self-assessment or questionnaire
    Ask you about alcohol, drug or other substance use
    Determine whether your illness preoccupation is better explained by another mental disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder or generalized anxiety disorder.

Treatment

The goal of treatment is to help you manage anxiety about your health and improve your ability to function in daily life. Psychotherapy — also called talk therapy — can be helpful for illness anxiety disorder. Sometimes medications may be added.
Psychotherapy

Because physical sensations can be related to emotional distress and health anxiety, psychotherapy — particularly cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) — can be an effective treatment. CBT helps you learn skills to manage illness anxiety disorder and find different ways to manage your worries other than excessive medical testing or avoidance of medical care.

CBT can help you:

    Identify your fears and beliefs about having a serious medical disease
    Learn alternate ways to view your body sensations by working to change unhelpful thoughts
    Become more aware of how your worries affect you and your behavior
    Change the way you respond to your body sensations and symptoms
    Learn skills to cope with and tolerate anxiety and stress
    Reduce avoidance of situations and activities due to physical sensations
    Reduce behaviors of frequently checking your body for signs of illness and repeatedly seeking reassurance
    Improve daily functioning at home, at work, in relationships and in social situations
    Address other mental health disorders, such as depression

Other therapies such as behavioral stress management and exposure therapy also may be helpful.
Medications

Antidepressants, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), may help treat illness anxiety disorder. Medications to treat mood or anxiety disorders, if present, also may help.

Talk with your doctor about medication options and the possible side effects and risks.
Lifestyle and home remedies

In addition to profession treatment for illness anxiety disorder, these self-care steps can help:

    Work with your provider. Work with your primary care provider or mental health professional to determine a regular schedule for visits to discuss your concerns and build a trusting relationship. Discuss setting reasonable limits on tests, evaluations and specialist referrals. Avoid seeking advice from multiple doctors or emergency room visits that can make your care harder to coordinate and may subject you to duplicate testing.
    Practice stress management and relaxation techniques. Learning stress management and relaxation methods, such as progressive muscle relaxation, may help reduce anxiety.
    Get physically active. A graduated activity program may have a calming effect on your mood, reduce your anxiety and help improve your physical functioning.
    Participate in activities. Staying involved in your work, as well as social and family activities, can provide you with support.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. Substance use can make your care more difficult. Talk to your primary care provider if you need help quitting.
    Avoid searching the internet for possible diseases. The vast amount of health information that may or may not be related to your situation can cause confusion and anxiety. If you have symptoms that concern you, talk to your primary care provider at your next scheduled appointment.

Preparing for your appointment

In addition to your medical evaluation, your primary care provider may refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, for evaluation and treatment.

Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment and what to expect from your primary care provider or mental health professional.
What you can do

    Your symptoms, including when they first occurred, how they impact your daily life and what you do to try to manage them
    Key personal information, including traumatic events in your past and any stressful major events
    Medical information, including other physical or mental health conditions that you have
    Medications, vitamins, herbs and other supplements you take and the dosages
    Questions to ask your doctor

Ask a trusted family member or friend to go with you to your appointment, if possible, to lend support and help you remember information.

Questions to ask your mental health professional may include:

    Do I have illness anxiety disorder?
    What treatment approach do you recommend?
    Would therapy be helpful in my case?
    If you're recommending therapy, how often will I need it and for how long?
    If you're recommending medications, are there any possible side effects?
    For how long will I need to take medication?
    How will you monitor whether my treatment is working?
    Are there any self-care steps I can take to help manage my condition?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask any other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your primary care provider or mental health professional may ask:

    What are your symptoms, and when did they first occur?
    How do your symptoms affect your life, such as at school, at work and in personal relationships?
    Have you or any of your close relatives been diagnosed with a mental health disorder?
    Have you been diagnosed with any medical conditions?
    Do you use alcohol or recreational drugs? How often?
    Do you get regular physical activity?

Your primary care provider or mental health professional will ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your appointment time.

mayoclinic.org
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) - Symptoms and causes
Print
9–11 minutes
Overview

It's normal to feel nervous in some social situations. For example, going on a date or giving a presentation may cause that feeling of butterflies in your stomach. But in social anxiety disorder, also called social phobia, everyday interactions cause significant anxiety, self-consciousness and embarrassment because you fear being scrutinized or judged negatively by others.

In social anxiety disorder, fear and anxiety lead to avoidance that can disrupt your life. Severe stress can affect your relationships, daily routines, work, school or other activities.

Social anxiety disorder can be a chronic mental health condition, but learning coping skills in psychotherapy and taking medications can help you gain confidence and improve your ability to interact with others.
Symptoms

Feelings of shyness or discomfort in certain situations aren't necessarily signs of social anxiety disorder, particularly in children. Comfort levels in social situations vary, depending on personality traits and life experiences. Some people are naturally reserved and others are more outgoing.

In contrast to everyday nervousness, social anxiety disorder includes fear, anxiety and avoidance that interfere with relationships, daily routines, work, school or other activities. Social anxiety disorder typically begins in the early to mid-teens, though it can sometimes start in younger children or in adults.
Emotional and behavioral symptoms

Signs and symptoms of social anxiety disorder can include constant:

    Fear of situations in which you may be judged negatively
    Worry about embarrassing or humiliating yourself
    Intense fear of interacting or talking with strangers
    Fear that others will notice that you look anxious
    Fear of physical symptoms that may cause you embarrassment, such as blushing, sweating, trembling or having a shaky voice
    Avoidance of doing things or speaking to people out of fear of embarrassment
    Avoidance of situations where you might be the center of attention
    Anxiety in anticipation of a feared activity or event
    Intense fear or anxiety during social situations
    Analysis of your performance and identification of flaws in your interactions after a social situation
    Expectation of the worst possible consequences from a negative experience during a social situation

For children, anxiety about interacting with adults or peers may be shown by crying, having temper tantrums, clinging to parents or refusing to speak in social situations.

Performance type of social anxiety disorder is when you experience intense fear and anxiety during speaking or performing in public but not in other types of more general social situations.
Physical symptoms

Physical signs and symptoms can sometimes accompany social anxiety disorder and may include:

    Blushing
    Fast heartbeat
    Trembling
    Sweating
    Upset stomach or nausea
    Trouble catching your breath
    Dizziness or lightheadedness
    Feeling that your mind has gone blank
    Muscle tension

Avoiding common social situations

Common, everyday experiences may be hard to endure when you have social anxiety disorder, including:

    Interacting with unfamiliar people or strangers
    Attending parties or social gatherings
    Going to work or school
    Starting conversations
    Making eye contact
    Dating
    Entering a room in which people are already seated
    Returning items to a store
    Eating in front of others
    Using a public restroom

Social anxiety disorder symptoms can change over time. They may flare up if you're facing a lot of changes, stress or demands in your life. Although avoiding situations that produce anxiety may make you feel better in the short term, your anxiety is likely to continue over the long term if you don't get treatment.
When to see a doctor

See your doctor or a mental health professional if you fear and avoid normal social situations because they cause embarrassment, worry or panic.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

Like many other mental health conditions, social anxiety disorder likely arises from a complex interaction of biological and environmental factors. Possible causes include:

    Inherited traits. Anxiety disorders tend to run in families. However, it isn't entirely clear how much of this may be due to genetics and how much is due to learned behavior.
    Brain structure. A structure in the brain called the amygdala (uh-MIG-duh-luh) may play a role in controlling the fear response. People who have an overactive amygdala may have a heightened fear response, causing increased anxiety in social situations.
    Environment. Social anxiety disorder may be a learned behavior — some people may develop significant anxiety after an unpleasant or embarrassing social situation. Also, there may be an association between social anxiety disorder and parents who either model anxious behavior in social situations or are more controlling or overprotective of their children.

Risk factors

Several factors can increase the risk of developing social anxiety disorder, including:

    Family history. You're more likely to develop social anxiety disorder if your biological parents or siblings have the condition.
    Negative experiences. Children who experience teasing, bullying, rejection, ridicule or humiliation may be more prone to social anxiety disorder. In addition, other negative events in life, such as family conflict, trauma or abuse, may be associated with this disorder.
    Temperament. Children who are shy, timid, withdrawn or restrained when facing new situations or people may be at greater risk.
    New social or work demands. Social anxiety disorder symptoms typically start in the teenage years, but meeting new people, giving a speech in public or making an important work presentation may trigger symptoms for the first time.
    Having an appearance or condition that draws attention. For example, facial disfigurement, stuttering or tremors due to Parkinson's disease can increase feelings of self-consciousness and may trigger social anxiety disorder in some people.

Complications

Left untreated, social anxiety disorder can control your life. Anxieties can interfere with work, school, relationships or enjoyment of life. This disorder can cause:

    Low self-esteem
    Trouble being assertive
    Negative self-talk
    Hypersensitivity to criticism
    Poor social skills
    Isolation and difficult social relationships
    Low academic and employment achievement
    Substance abuse, such as drinking too much alcohol
    Suicide or suicide attempts

Other anxiety disorders and certain other mental health disorders, particularly major depressive disorder and substance abuse problems, often occur with social anxiety disorder.
Prevention

There's no way to predict what will cause someone to develop an anxiety disorder, but you can take steps to reduce the impact of symptoms if you're anxious:

    Get help early. Anxiety, like many other mental health conditions, can be harder to treat if you wait.
    Keep a journal. Keeping track of your personal life can help you and your mental health professional identify what's causing you stress and what seems to help you feel better.
    Set priorities in your life. You can reduce anxiety by carefully managing your time and energy. Make sure that you spend time doing things you enjoy.
    Avoid unhealthy substance use. Alcohol and drug use and even caffeine or nicotine use can cause or worsen anxiety. If you're addicted to any of these substances, quitting can make you anxious. If you can't quit on your own, see your health care provider or find a treatment program or support group to help you.


mayoclinic.org
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
12–15 minutes
Diagnosis

Your health care provider will want to determine whether other conditions may be causing your anxiety or if you have social anxiety disorder along with another physical or mental health disorder.

Your health care provider may determine a diagnosis based on:

    Physical exam to help assess whether any medical condition or medication may trigger symptoms of anxiety
    Discussion of your symptoms, how often they occur and in what situations
    Review of a list of situations to see if they make you anxious
    Self-report questionnaires about symptoms of social anxiety
    Criteria listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association

DSM-5 criteria for social anxiety disorder include:

    Persistent, intense fear or anxiety about specific social situations because you believe you may be judged negatively, embarrassed or humiliated
    Avoidance of anxiety-producing social situations or enduring them with intense fear or anxiety
    Excessive anxiety that's out of proportion to the situation
    Anxiety or distress that interferes with your daily living
    Fear or anxiety that is not better explained by a medical condition, medication or substance abuse

Treatment

Treatment depends on how much social anxiety disorder affects your ability to function in daily life. The most common treatment for social anxiety disorder includes psychotherapy (also called psychological counseling or talk therapy) or medications or both.
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy improves symptoms in most people with social anxiety disorder. In therapy, you learn how to recognize and change negative thoughts about yourself and develop skills to help you gain confidence in social situations.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is the most effective type of psychotherapy for anxiety, and it can be equally effective when conducted individually or in groups.

In exposure-based CBT, you gradually work up to facing the situations you fear most. This can improve your coping skills and help you develop the confidence to deal with anxiety-inducing situations. You may also participate in skills training or role-playing to practice your social skills and gain comfort and confidence relating to others. Practicing exposures to social situations is particularly helpful to challenge your worries.
First choices in medications

Though several types of medications are available, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are often the first type of drug tried for persistent symptoms of social anxiety. Your health care provider may prescribe paroxetine (Paxil) or sertraline (Zoloft).

The serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine (Effexor XR) also may be an option for social anxiety disorder.

To reduce the risk of side effects, your health care provider may start you at a low dose of medication and gradually increase your prescription to a full dose. It may take several weeks to several months of treatment for your symptoms to noticeably improve.
Other medications

Your health care provider may also prescribe other medications for symptoms of social anxiety, such as:

    Other antidepressants. You may have to try several different antidepressants to find the one that's most effective for you with the fewest side effects.
    Anti-anxiety medications. Benzodiazepines (ben-zoe-die-AZ-uh-peens) may reduce your level of anxiety. Although they often work quickly, they can be habit-forming and sedating, so they're typically prescribed for only short-term use.
    Beta blockers. These medications work by blocking the stimulating effect of epinephrine (adrenaline). They may reduce heart rate, blood pressure, pounding of the heart, and shaking voice and limbs. Because of that, they may work best when used infrequently to control symptoms for a particular situation, such as giving a speech. They're not recommended for general treatment of social anxiety disorder.

Stick with it

Don't give up if treatment doesn't work quickly. You can continue to make strides in psychotherapy over several weeks or months. Learning new skills to help manage your anxiety takes time. And finding the right medication for your situation can take some trial and error.

For some people, the symptoms of social anxiety disorder may fade over time, and medication can be discontinued. Others may need to take medication for years to prevent a relapse.

To make the most of treatment, keep your medical or therapy appointments, challenge yourself by setting goals to approach social situations that cause you anxiety, take medications as directed, and talk to your health care provider about any changes in your condition.
Alternative medicine

Several herbal remedies have been studied as treatments for anxiety, but results are mixed. Before taking any herbal remedies or supplements, talk with your health care team to make sure they're safe and won't interact with any medications you take.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Although social anxiety disorder generally requires help from a medical expert or qualified psychotherapist, you can try some of these techniques to handle situations that are likely to trigger symptoms:

    Learn stress-reduction skills.
    Get physical exercise or be physically active on a regular basis.
    Get enough sleep.
    Eat a healthy, well-balanced diet.
    Avoid alcohol.
    Limit or avoid caffeine.
    Participate in social situations by reaching out to people with whom you feel comfortable.

Practice in small steps

First, consider your fears to identify what situations cause the most anxiety. Then gradually practice these activities until they cause you less anxiety. Begin with small steps by setting daily or weekly goals in situations that aren't overwhelming. The more you practice, the less anxious you'll feel.

Consider practicing these situations:

    Eat with a close relative, friend or acquaintance in a public setting.
    Purposefully make eye contact and return greetings from others, or be the first to say hello.
    Give someone a compliment.
    Ask a retail clerk to help you find an item.
    Get directions from a stranger.
    Show an interest in others — ask about their homes, children, grandchildren, hobbies or travels, for instance.
    Call a friend to make plans.

Prepare for social situations

At first, being social when you're feeling anxious is challenging. As difficult or painful as it may seem initially, don't avoid situations that trigger your symptoms. By regularly facing these kinds of situations, you'll continue to build and reinforce your coping skills.

These strategies can help you begin to face situations that make you nervous:

    Prepare for conversation, for example, by reading about current events to identify interesting stories you can talk about.
    Focus on personal qualities you like about yourself.
    Practice relaxation exercises.
    Learn stress management techniques.
    Set realistic social goals.
    Pay attention to how often the embarrassing situations you're afraid of actually take place. You may notice that the scenarios you fear usually don't come to pass.
    When embarrassing situations do happen, remind yourself that your feelings will pass and you can handle them until they do. Most people around you either don't notice or don't care as much as you think, or they're more forgiving than you assume.

Avoid using alcohol to calm your nerves. It may seem like it helps temporarily, but in the long term it can make you feel even more anxious.
Coping and support

These coping methods may help ease your anxiety:

    Routinely reach out to friends and family members.
    Join a local or reputable internet-based support group.
    Join a group that offers opportunities to improve communication and public speaking skills, such as Toastmasters International.
    Do pleasurable or relaxing activities, such as hobbies, when you feel anxious.

Over time, these coping methods can help control your symptoms and prevent a relapse. Remind yourself that you can get through anxious moments, that your anxiety is short-lived and that the negative consequences you worry about so much rarely come to pass.
Preparing for your appointment

You may see your primary care provider, or your provider may refer you to a mental health professional. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Situations you've been avoiding, especially those that are important to your functioning
    Any symptoms you've been experiencing, and for how long, including any symptoms that may seem unrelated to the reason for your appointment
    Key personal information, especially any significant events or changes in your life shortly before your symptoms appeared
    Medical information, including other physical or mental health conditions with which you've been diagnosed
    Any medications, vitamins, herbs or other supplements you're taking, including dosages
    Questions to ask your health care provider or a mental health professional

You may want to ask a trusted family member or friend to go with you to your appointment, if possible, to help you remember key information.

Some questions to ask your health care provider may include:

    What do you believe is causing my symptoms?
    Are there any other possible causes?
    How will you determine my diagnosis?
    Should I see a mental health specialist?
    Is my condition likely temporary or chronic?
    Are effective treatments available for this condition?
    With treatment, could I eventually be comfortable in the situations that make me so anxious now?
    Am I at increased risk of other mental health problems?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your health care provider

Your health care provider or a mental health professional will likely ask you a number of questions. Be ready to answer them to reserve time to go over any points you want to focus on. Your health care provider may ask:

    Does fear of embarrassment cause you to avoid doing certain activities or speaking to people?
    Do you avoid activities in which you're the center of attention?
    Would you say that being embarrassed or looking stupid is among your worst fears?
    When did you first notice these symptoms?
    When are your symptoms most likely to occur?
    Does anything seem to make your symptoms better or worse?
    How are your symptoms affecting your life, including work and personal relationships?
    Do you ever have symptoms when you're not being observed by others?
    Have any of your close relatives had similar symptoms?
    Have you been diagnosed with any medical conditions?
    Have you been treated for mental health symptoms or mental illness in the past? If yes, what type of therapy was most beneficial?
    Have you ever thought about harming yourself or others?
    Do you drink alcohol or use recreational drugs? If so, how often?


mayoclinic.org
Separation anxiety disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
5–7 minutes
Overview

Separation anxiety is a typical phase for many infants and toddlers. Young children often have a period where they get anxious or distressed when they have to separate from their parent or main caregivers. Examples of this can be tears at daycare drop-off or getting fussy when a new person holds them. This usually starts to improve by about 2 to 3 years of age.

In some children, intense and ongoing separation anxiety is a sign of a more serious condition known as separation anxiety disorder. Separation anxiety disorder can be identified as early as preschool age.

Your child may have separation anxiety disorder if separation anxiety seems more intense than other kids of the same age or lasts a longer time, interferes with school or other daily activities, or includes panic attacks or other problem behaviors. Most often, separation anxiety relates to the child's anxiety about being away from parents or guardians, but it could relate to another close caregiver.

Less often, separation anxiety disorder can occur in teenagers and adults. This can cause major problems leaving home or going to work.

Treatment can lessen separation anxiety disorder symptoms. Treatment may include specific types of therapy, sometimes along with medicine.
Symptoms

Separation anxiety disorder is diagnosed when symptoms are much more than expected for someone's developmental age and cause major distress or problems doing daily activities. Symptoms may include:

    Repeated and intense distress when thinking about separation or when away from home or loved ones. This may include being clingy or having tantrums about separation that last longer or are more severe than other kids of the same age.
    Constant, intense worry about losing a parent or other loved one to an illness, death, or a disaster or harm coming to them.
    Constant worry that something bad will happen, such as being lost or kidnapped, causing separation from parents or other loved ones.
    Not wanting to or refusing to be away from home because of fear of separation.
    Not wanting to be home alone or somewhere without a parent or other loved one close by, if the child has reached an age where being alone might be expected.
    Not wanting to or refusing to sleep away from home or to go to sleep without a parent or other loved one nearby, if the child has reached an age where these activities might be expected.
    Repeated nightmares about separation.
    Repeated complaints of headaches, stomachaches, or other symptoms during or before separation from a parent or other loved one.

Separation anxiety disorder may occur along with panic attacks. Panic attacks are repeated bouts of sudden feelings of intense anxiety and fear or terror that reach a peak within minutes.
When to see a doctor

Separation anxiety disorder usually won't go away without treatment and can lead to panic disorder and other anxiety disorders into adulthood.

If you have concerns about your child's separation anxiety, talk to your child's pediatrician or other healthcare professional.
Causes

Sometimes, separation anxiety can be triggered by life stress that results in separation from a loved one. Examples include divorce of parents, changing schools, moving to a new location or a loved one's death. Genetics may play a role in separation anxiety becoming separation anxiety disorder.
Risk factors

Separation anxiety disorder most often begins in childhood. But it may continue into the teenage years and sometimes into adulthood.

Risk factors may include:

    Life stresses or loss that result in separation. Examples include the illness or death of a loved one, loss of a beloved pet, divorce of parents, or moving or going away to school.
    Family history. Having blood relatives who have anxiety symptoms or an anxiety disorder may increase the risk of having separation anxiety disorder.
    Situational issues. Experiencing some type of disaster or traumatic life event may increase the risk of separation anxiety disorder.

Complications

Separation anxiety disorder causes major distress and problems functioning at home, in social situations, or at work or school.

Disorders that can occur along with separation anxiety disorder include:

    Other anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, phobias, social anxiety disorder or agoraphobia.
    Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
    Depression.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent separation anxiety disorder in your child, but these suggestions may help.

    Get professional advice as soon as possible if you're concerned that your child's anxiety is much worse than others at the same developmental stage. Early diagnosis and treatment can help lessen anxiety symptoms and keep the condition from getting worse.
    Follow the treatment plan to help prevent relapses or worsening of symptoms.
    Get your own evidence-based treatment and support if you have anxiety, depression or other mental health concerns, so that you can model healthy coping skills for your child.


mayoclinic.org
Separation anxiety disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
6–7 minutes
Diagnosis

Diagnosis of separation anxiety disorder involves figuring out whether your child is going through a typical stage of development or if the symptoms are serious enough to be considered separation anxiety disorder. After ruling out any medical conditions, your child's pediatrician may refer you to a mental health professional with expertise in anxiety disorders in children.

To help diagnose separation anxiety disorder, a mental health professional will likely talk with you and your child, usually together and also separately. Sometimes called a psychological evaluation, a structured interview involves talking about thoughts and feelings and behavior.
Treatment

Separation anxiety disorder is usually treated first with psychotherapy. Sometimes medicine also is used if therapy alone isn't working. Psychotherapy involves working with a trained therapist to lessen separation anxiety symptoms.
Psychotherapy

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is an effective form of therapy for separation anxiety disorder. Exposure treatment, a part of CBT, has been found to be helpful for separation anxiety. During this type of treatment your child can learn how to face and manage fears about separation and uncertainty. Also, parents can learn how to effectively give emotional support and encourage independence that suits the child's age.
Medicine

Sometimes, combining medicine with CBT may be helpful if anxiety symptoms are severe and a child isn't making progress in therapy alone. Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may be an option for older children and adults.
Lifestyle and home remedies

While separation anxiety disorder gets better with professional treatment, you also can take these steps to help ease your child's separation anxiety:

    Learn about your child's separation anxiety disorder. Talk to your child's mental health professional to learn about the condition and help your child understand it.
    Follow the treatment plan. Keep the therapy appointments for your child. Consistency makes a big difference.
    Take action. Learn what triggers your child's anxiety. Practice the skills learned from the mental health professional so you're ready to deal with your child's anxious feelings during separations.

Coping and support

Coping with a child who has separation anxiety disorder can be frustrating and cause conflict with family members. It also can cause a great deal of worry and anxiety for parents.

Ask your child's therapist for advice on coping and support. For example, the therapist may suggest you:

    Show calm support. Encourage your child to try new experiences, experience separation and develop independence with your support. Model bravery when facing your own distress to help when your child is facing fears.
    Practice goodbyes. Leave your child with a trusted caregiver for short periods of time to help your child learn that you will return.

It's also important to have supportive relationships for yourself, so you can better help your child.
Preparing for your appointment

If you think your child may have separation anxiety disorder, start by seeing your child's pediatrician. The pediatrician may refer you to a mental health professional with expertise in anxiety disorders.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Your child's symptoms. Note when they occur, whether anything seems to make them better or worse, and how much they affect day-to-day activities and interactions.
    What causes your child to be anxious. Include any major life changes or stressful events your child dealt with recently, as well as any past traumatic experiences.
    Any family history of mental health problems. Note if you, your spouse, your parents, grandparents, siblings or your other children have struggled with any mental health problems.
    Any health problems your child has. Include both physical health conditions and mental health problems.
    All medicines that your child takes. Also include any vitamins, herbs or other supplements, and the doses.
    Questions to ask the healthcare professional or mental health professional.

Questions to ask may include:

    What do you think is causing or worsening the anxiety?
    Are any tests needed?
    What type of therapy might help?
    Would medicine help? If so, is there a generic option?
    Besides professional treatment, are there any steps I can take at home that might help?
    Do you have any materials that can help me learn more? What websites do you suggest?

Feel free to ask other questions during the appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

The mental health professional is likely to ask you questions. For example:

    What are your child's symptoms, and how severe are they? How do they affect your child's ability to do daily activities?
    When did you first begin noticing your child's separation anxiety?
    How do you respond to your child's anxiety?
    What, if anything, seems to make your child's anxiety worse? What makes it better?
    Has your child had any traumatic experiences recently or in the past?
    What, if any, physical or mental health conditions does your child have?
    Does your child take any medicines?
    Do you or any of your blood relatives have ongoing anxiety or other mental health conditions, such as depression?

Be ready to answer questions so that you have time to talk about what's most important to you.

mayoclinic.org
Anxiety disorders - Symptoms and causes
Print
10–12 minutes
Overview

Experiencing occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. However, people with anxiety disorders frequently have intense, excessive and persistent worry and fear about everyday situations. Often, anxiety disorders involve repeated episodes of sudden feelings of intense anxiety and fear or terror that reach a peak within minutes (panic attacks).

These feelings of anxiety and panic interfere with daily activities, are difficult to control, are out of proportion to the actual danger and can last a long time. You may avoid places or situations to prevent these feelings. Symptoms may start during childhood or the teen years and continue into adulthood.

Examples of anxiety disorders include generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), specific phobias and separation anxiety disorder. You can have more than one anxiety disorder. Sometimes anxiety results from a medical condition that needs treatment.

Whatever form of anxiety you have, treatment can help.
Symptoms

Common anxiety signs and symptoms include:

    Feeling nervous, restless or tense
    Having a sense of impending danger, panic or doom
    Having an increased heart rate
    Breathing rapidly (hyperventilation)
    Sweating
    Trembling
    Feeling weak or tired
    Trouble concentrating or thinking about anything other than the present worry
    Having trouble sleeping
    Experiencing gastrointestinal (GI) problems
    Having difficulty controlling worry
    Having the urge to avoid things that trigger anxiety

Several types of anxiety disorders exist:

    Agoraphobia (ag-uh-ruh-FOE-be-uh) is a type of anxiety disorder in which you fear and often avoid places or situations that might cause you to panic and make you feel trapped, helpless or embarrassed.
    Anxiety disorder due to a medical condition includes symptoms of intense anxiety or panic that are directly caused by a physical health problem.
    Generalized anxiety disorder includes persistent and excessive anxiety and worry about activities or events — even ordinary, routine issues. The worry is out of proportion to the actual circumstance, is difficult to control and affects how you feel physically. It often occurs along with other anxiety disorders or depression.
    Panic disorder involves repeated episodes of sudden feelings of intense anxiety and fear or terror that reach a peak within minutes (panic attacks). You may have feelings of impending doom, shortness of breath, chest pain, or a rapid, fluttering or pounding heart (heart palpitations). These panic attacks may lead to worrying about them happening again or avoiding situations in which they've occurred.
    Selective mutism is a consistent failure of children to speak in certain situations, such as school, even when they can speak in other situations, such as at home with close family members. This can interfere with school, work and social functioning.
    Separation anxiety disorder is a childhood disorder characterized by anxiety that's excessive for the child's developmental level and related to separation from parents or others who have parental roles.
    Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) involves high levels of anxiety, fear and avoidance of social situations due to feelings of embarrassment, self-consciousness and concern about being judged or viewed negatively by others.
    Specific phobias are characterized by major anxiety when you're exposed to a specific object or situation and a desire to avoid it. Phobias provoke panic attacks in some people.
    Substance-induced anxiety disorder is characterized by symptoms of intense anxiety or panic that are a direct result of misusing drugs, taking medications, being exposed to a toxic substance or withdrawal from drugs.
    Other specified anxiety disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder are terms for anxiety or phobias that don't meet the exact criteria for any other anxiety disorders but are significant enough to be distressing and disruptive.

When to see a doctor

See your doctor if:

    You feel like you're worrying too much and it's interfering with your work, relationships or other parts of your life
    Your fear, worry or anxiety is upsetting to you and difficult to control
    You feel depressed, have trouble with alcohol or drug use, or have other mental health concerns along with anxiety
    You think your anxiety could be linked to a physical health problem
    You have suicidal thoughts or behaviors — if this is the case, seek emergency treatment immediately

Your worries may not go away on their own, and they may get worse over time if you don't seek help. See your doctor or a mental health provider before your anxiety gets worse. It's easier to treat if you get help early.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

The causes of anxiety disorders aren't fully understood. Life experiences such as traumatic events appear to trigger anxiety disorders in people who are already prone to anxiety. Inherited traits also can be a factor.
Medical causes

For some people, anxiety may be linked to an underlying health issue. In some cases, anxiety signs and symptoms are the first indicators of a medical illness. If your doctor suspects your anxiety may have a medical cause, he or she may order tests to look for signs of a problem.

Examples of medical problems that can be linked to anxiety include:

    Heart disease
    Diabetes
    Thyroid problems, such as hyperthyroidism
    Respiratory disorders, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma
    Drug misuse or withdrawal
    Withdrawal from alcohol, anti-anxiety medications (benzodiazepines) or other medications
    Chronic pain or irritable bowel syndrome
    Rare tumors that produce certain fight-or-flight hormones

Sometimes anxiety can be a side effect of certain medications.

It's possible that your anxiety may be due to an underlying medical condition if:

    You don't have any blood relatives (such as a parent or sibling) with an anxiety disorder
    You didn't have an anxiety disorder as a child
    You don't avoid certain things or situations because of anxiety
    You have a sudden occurrence of anxiety that seems unrelated to life events and you didn't have a previous history of anxiety

Risk factors

These factors may increase your risk of developing an anxiety disorder:

    Trauma. Children who endured abuse or trauma or witnessed traumatic events are at higher risk of developing an anxiety disorder at some point in life. Adults who experience a traumatic event also can develop anxiety disorders.
    Stress due to an illness. Having a health condition or serious illness can cause significant worry about issues such as your treatment and your future.
    Stress buildup. A big event or a buildup of smaller stressful life situations may trigger excessive anxiety — for example, a death in the family, work stress or ongoing worry about finances.
    Personality. People with certain personality types are more prone to anxiety disorders than others are.
    Other mental health disorders. People with other mental health disorders, such as depression, often also have an anxiety disorder.
    Having blood relatives with an anxiety disorder. Anxiety disorders can run in families.
    Drugs or alcohol. Drug or alcohol use or misuse or withdrawal can cause or worsen anxiety.

Complications

Having an anxiety disorder does more than make you worry. It can also lead to, or worsen, other mental and physical conditions, such as:

    Depression (which often occurs with an anxiety disorder) or other mental health disorders
    Substance misuse
    Trouble sleeping (insomnia)
    Digestive or bowel problems
    Headaches and chronic pain
    Social isolation
    Problems functioning at school or work
    Poor quality of life
    Suicide

Prevention

There's no way to predict for certain what will cause someone to develop an anxiety disorder, but you can take steps to reduce the impact of symptoms if you're anxious:

    Get help early. Anxiety, like many other mental health conditions, can be harder to treat if you wait.
    Stay active. Participate in activities that you enjoy and that make you feel good about yourself. Enjoy social interaction and caring relationships, which can lessen your worries.
    Avoid alcohol or drug use. Alcohol and drug use can cause or worsen anxiety. If you're addicted to any of these substances, quitting can make you anxious. If you can't quit on your own, see your doctor or find a support group to help you.


mayoclinic.org
Anxiety disorders - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
10–13 minutes
Diagnosis

You may start by seeing your primary care provider to find out if your anxiety could be related to your physical health. He or she can check for signs of an underlying medical condition that may need treatment.

However, you may need to see a mental health specialist if you have severe anxiety. A psychiatrist is a medical doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. A psychologist and certain other mental health professionals can diagnose anxiety and provide counseling (psychotherapy).

To help diagnose an anxiety disorder, your mental health provider may:

    Give you a psychological evaluation. This involves discussing your thoughts, feelings and behavior to help pinpoint a diagnosis and check for related complications. Anxiety disorders often occur along with other mental health problems — such as depression or substance misuse — which can make diagnosis more challenging.
    Compare your symptoms to the criteria in the DSM-5. Many doctors use the criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association, to diagnose an anxiety disorder.

Treatment

The two main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy and medications. You may benefit most from a combination of the two. It may take some trial and error to discover which treatments work best for you.
Psychotherapy

Also known as talk therapy or psychological counseling, psychotherapy involves working with a therapist to reduce your anxiety symptoms. It can be an effective treatment for anxiety.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is the most effective form of psychotherapy for anxiety disorders. Generally a short-term treatment, CBT focuses on teaching you specific skills to improve your symptoms and gradually return to the activities you've avoided because of anxiety.

CBT includes exposure therapy, in which you gradually encounter the object or situation that triggers your anxiety so you build confidence that you can manage the situation and anxiety symptoms.
Medications

Several types of medications are used to help relieve symptoms, depending on the type of anxiety disorder you have and whether you also have other mental or physical health issues. For example:

    Certain antidepressants are also used to treat anxiety disorders.
    An anti-anxiety medication called buspirone may be prescribed.
    In limited circumstances, your doctor may prescribe other types of medications, such as sedatives, also called benzodiazepines, or beta blockers. These medications are for short-term relief of anxiety symptoms and are not intended to be used long term.

Talk with your doctor about benefits, risks and possible side effects of medications.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

While most people with anxiety disorders need psychotherapy or medications to get anxiety under control, lifestyle changes also can make a difference. Here's what you can do:

    Keep physically active. Develop a routine so that you're physically active most days of the week. Exercise is a powerful stress reducer. It may improve your mood and help you stay healthy. Start out slowly and gradually increase the amount and intensity of your activities.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. These substances can cause or worsen anxiety. If you can't quit on your own, see your doctor or find a support group to help you.
    Quit smoking and cut back or quit drinking caffeinated beverages. Both nicotine and caffeine can worsen anxiety.
    Use stress management and relaxation techniques. Visualization techniques, meditation and yoga are examples of relaxation techniques that can ease anxiety.
    Make sleep a priority. Do what you can to make sure you're getting enough sleep to feel rested. If you aren't sleeping well, see your doctor.
    Eat healthy. Healthy eating — such as focusing on vegetables, fruits, whole grains and fish — may be linked to reduced anxiety, but more research is needed.

Alternative medicine

Several herbal remedies have been studied as a treatment for anxiety, but more research is needed to understand the risks and benefits. Herbal and dietary supplements aren't monitored by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the same way medications are. You can't always be certain of what you're getting and whether it's safe. Some of these supplements can interfere with prescription medications or cause dangerous interactions.

Before taking herbal remedies or dietary supplements, talk to your doctor to make sure they're safe for you and won't interact with any medications you take.
Coping and support

To cope with an anxiety disorder, here's what you can do:

    Learn about your disorder. Talk to your doctor or mental health provider. Find out what might be causing your specific condition and what treatments might be best for you. Involve your family and friends and ask for their support.
    Stick to your treatment plan. Take medications as directed. Keep therapy appointments and complete any assignments your therapist may give you. Consistency can make a big difference, especially when it comes to taking your medication.
    Take action. Learn what triggers your anxiety or causes you stress. Practice the strategies you developed with your mental health provider so you're ready to deal with anxious feelings in these situations.
    Keep a journal. Keeping track of your personal life can help you and your mental health provider identify what's causing you stress and what seems to help you feel better.
    Join an anxiety support group. Remember that you aren't alone. Support groups offer compassion, understanding and shared experiences. The National Alliance on Mental Illness and the Anxiety and Depression Association of America provide information on finding support.
    Learn time management techniques. You can reduce anxiety by learning how to carefully manage your time and energy.
    Socialize. Don't let worries isolate you from loved ones or activities.
    Break the cycle. When you feel anxious, take a brisk walk or delve into a hobby to refocus your mind away from your worries.

Preparing for your appointment

You may start by seeing your primary care provider. He or she may refer you to a mental health professional.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Your anxiety symptoms. Note when they occur, whether anything seems to make them better or worse, and how much they affect your day-to-day activities and interactions.
    What causes you stress. Include any major life changes or stressful events you've dealt with recently. Also note any traumatic experiences you've had in the past or as a child.
    Any family history of mental health problems. Note if your parents, grandparents, siblings or children have struggled with any mental health problems.
    Any other health problems you have. Include both physical conditions and mental health issues.
    All medications you're taking. Include any medications, vitamins, herbs or other supplements, and the doses.
    Questions to ask your doctor to make the most of your appointment.

Some basic questions to ask your doctor include:

    What's the most likely cause of my anxiety?
    Are there other possible situations, psychological issues or physical health problems that could be causing or worsening my anxiety?
    Do I need any tests?
    Should I see a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health provider?
    What type of therapy might help me?
    Would medication help? If so, is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    In addition to treatment, are there any steps I can take at home that might help?
    Do you have any educational materials that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor will likely ask you several questions, such as:

    What are your symptoms, and how severe are they? How do they impact your ability to function?
    Have you ever had a panic attack?
    Do you avoid certain things or situations because they make you anxious?
    Have your feelings of anxiety been occasional or continuous?
    When did you first begin noticing your feelings of anxiety?
    Does anything in particular seem to trigger your anxiety or make it worse?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your feelings of anxiety?
    What traumatic experiences have you had recently or in the past?
    What, if any, physical or mental health conditions do you have?
    Do you take any prescription drugs?
    Do you regularly drink alcohol or use recreational drugs?
    Do you have any blood relatives who have anxiety or other mental health conditions, such as depression?

Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your time.



mayoclinic.org
Body dysmorphic disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
6–8 minutes
Overview

Body dysmorphic disorder is a mental health condition in which you can't stop thinking about one or more perceived defects or flaws in your appearance — a flaw that appears minor or can't be seen by others. But you may feel so embarrassed, ashamed and anxious that you may avoid many social situations.

When you have body dysmorphic disorder, you intensely focus on your appearance and body image, repeatedly checking the mirror, grooming or seeking reassurance, sometimes for many hours each day. Your perceived flaw and the repetitive behaviors cause you significant distress and impact your ability to function in your daily life.

You may seek out numerous cosmetic procedures to try to "fix" your perceived flaw. Afterward, you may feel temporary satisfaction or a reduction in your distress, but often the anxiety returns and you may resume searching for other ways to fix your perceived flaw.

Treatment of body dysmorphic disorder may include cognitive behavioral therapy and medication.
Symptoms

Signs and symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder include:

    Being extremely preoccupied with a perceived flaw in appearance that to others can't be seen or appears minor
    Strong belief that you have a defect in your appearance that makes you ugly or deformed
    Belief that others take special notice of your appearance in a negative way or mock you
    Engaging in behaviors aimed at fixing or hiding the perceived flaw that are difficult to resist or control, such as frequently checking the mirror, grooming or skin picking
    Attempting to hide perceived flaws with styling, makeup or clothes
    Constantly comparing your appearance with others
    Frequently seeking reassurance about your appearance from others
    Having perfectionist tendencies
    Seeking cosmetic procedures with little satisfaction
    Avoiding social situations

Preoccupation with your appearance and excessive thoughts and repetitive behaviors can be unwanted, difficult to control and so time-consuming that they can cause major distress or problems in your social life, work, school or other areas of functioning.

You may excessively focus over one or more parts of your body. The bodily feature that you focus on may change over time. The most common features people tend to fixate about include:

    Face, such as nose, complexion, wrinkles, acne and other blemishes
    Hair, such as appearance, thinning and baldness
    Skin and vein appearance
    Breast size
    Muscle size and tone
    Genitalia

A preoccupation with your body build being too small or not muscular enough (muscle dysmorphia) occurs almost exclusively in males.

Insight about body dysmorphic disorder varies. You may recognize that your beliefs about your perceived flaws may be excessive or not be true, or think that they probably are true, or be absolutely convinced that they're true. The more convinced you are of your beliefs, the more distress and disruption you may experience in your life.
When to see a doctor

Shame and embarrassment about your appearance may keep you from seeking treatment for body dysmorphic disorder. But if you have any signs or symptoms, see your health care provider or a mental health professional.

Body dysmorphic disorder usually doesn't get better on its own. If left untreated, it may get worse over time, leading to anxiety, extensive medical bills, severe depression, and even suicidal thoughts and behavior.
If you have suicidal thoughts

Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common with body dysmorphic disorder. If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, get help right away:

    In the U.S, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
    Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential.
    Call your mental health professional.
    Seek help from your primary care provider.
    Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
    Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.

Causes

It's not known specifically what causes body dysmorphic disorder. Like many other mental health conditions, body dysmorphic disorder may result from a combination of issues, such as a family history of the disorder, negative evaluations or experiences about your body or self-image, and abnormal brain function or abnormal levels of the brain chemical called serotonin.
Risk factors

Body dysmorphic disorder typically starts in the early teenage years and it affects both males and females.

Certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering body dysmorphic disorder, including:

    Having blood relatives with body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder
    Negative life experiences, such as childhood teasing, neglect or abuse
    Certain personality traits, such as perfectionism
    Societal pressure or expectations of beauty
    Having another mental health condition, such as anxiety or depression

Complications

Complications that may be caused by or associated with body dysmorphic disorder include, for example:

    Low self-esteem
    Social isolation
    Major depression or other mood disorders
    Suicidal thoughts or behavior
    Anxiety disorders, including social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
    Obsessive-compulsive disorder
    Eating disorders
    Substance misuse
    Health problems from behaviors such as skin picking
    Physical pain or risk of disfigurement due to repeated surgical interventions

Prevention

There's no known way to prevent body dysmorphic disorder. However, because body dysmorphic disorder often starts in the early teenage years, identifying the disorder early and starting treatment may be of some benefit.

Long-term maintenance treatment also may help prevent a relapse of body dysmorphic disorder symptoms.

Dec. 13, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Body dysmorphic disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
8–10 minutes
Diagnosis

After a medical evaluation to help rule out other medical conditions, your health care provider may make a referral to a mental health professional for further evaluation.

Diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder is typically based on:

    A psychological evaluation that assesses risk factors and thoughts, feelings, and behaviors related to negative self-image
    Personal, social, family and medical history
    Signs and symptoms

Treatment

Treatment for body dysmorphic disorder often includes a combination of cognitive behavioral therapy and medications.
Cognitive behavioral therapy

Cognitive behavioral therapy for body dysmorphic disorder focuses on:

    Helping you learn how negative thoughts, emotional reactions and behaviors maintain problems over time
    Challenging automatic negative thoughts about your body image and learning more-flexible ways of thinking
    Learning alternate ways to handle urges or rituals to help reduce mirror checking, reassurance seeking or excess use of medical services
    Teaching you other behaviors to improve your mental health, such as addressing social avoidance and increasing engagement with healthy supports and activities

You and your mental health provider can talk about your goals for therapy and develop a personalized treatment plan to learn and strengthen coping skills. Involving family members in treatment may be particularly important, especially for teenagers.
Medications

Although there are no medications specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat body dysmorphic disorder, medications used to treat other mental health conditions — such as depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder — can be effective.

    Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Because body dysmorphic disorder could be caused in part by problems related to the brain chemical serotonin, SSRIs may be prescribed. SSRIs appear to be more effective for body dysmorphic disorder than other antidepressants and may help control your negative thoughts and repetitive behaviors.
    Other medications. In some cases, you may benefit from taking other medications in addition to an SSRI, depending on your symptoms.

Hospitalization

In some cases, your body dysmorphic disorder symptoms may be so severe that you require psychiatric hospitalization. This is generally recommended only when you aren't able to keep up with day-to-day responsibilities or when you're in immediate danger of harming yourself.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Body dysmorphic disorder warrants treatment from a mental health professional. But you can do some things to build on your treatment plan, such as:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions, even if you don't feel like going. Even if you're feeling well, continue to take your medications. If you stop, symptoms may come back. You could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms from stopping a medication too suddenly.
    Learn about your disorder. Education about body dysmorphic disorder can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan.
    Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your health care provider or mental health provider to learn what might trigger your symptoms. Make a plan so you know what to do if symptoms return. Contact your health care provider or mental health provider if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel.
    Practice learned strategies. At home, routinely practice the skills you learn during therapy so they become stronger habits.
    Avoid drugs and alcohol. Alcohol and recreational drugs can worsen symptoms or interact with medications.
    Get active. Physical activity and exercise can help manage many symptoms, such as depression, stress and anxiety. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or taking up another form of physical activity you enjoy. However, avoid excessive exercise as a way to fix a perceived flaw.

Coping and support

Talk with your health care provider or mental health professional about improving your coping skills, and ways to focus on identifying, monitoring and changing the negative thoughts and behaviors about your appearance.

Consider these tips to help cope with body dysmorphic disorder:

    Write in a journal. This can help you better identify negative thoughts, emotions and behaviors.
    Don't become isolated. Try to participate in social activities and regularly get together with friends and family who can act as healthy supports.
    Take care of yourself. Eat healthy, stay physically active and get sufficient sleep.
    Join a support group. Connect with others facing similar challenges.
    Stay focused on your goals. Recovery is an ongoing process. Stay motivated by keeping your recovery goals in mind.
    Learn relaxation and stress management. Try practicing stress-reduction techniques such as meditation or deep breathing.
    Don't make important decisions when you're feeling distress or despair. You may not be thinking clearly and may regret your decisions later.

Preparing for your appointment

Although you may start out talking with your health care provider about your concerns, you'll likely be referred to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, for further evaluation and specialized treatment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you or your family noticed, and for how long. Ask friends or family members if they've felt concerned about your behavior and what they've noticed.
    Key personal information, including traumatic events in your past and any current, major stressors. Find out about your family's medical history, including any history of mental health conditions such as body dysmorphic disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
    Your medical information, including other physical or mental health conditions with which you've been diagnosed.
    All medications you take, including the names and doses of any medications, herbs, vitamins or other supplements you're taking.
    Questions you want to ask your health care provider or mental health provider to make the most of your appointment.

Some basic questions to ask include:

    What do you think is most likely causing my symptoms?
    What are other possible causes of my symptoms?
    Could behavioral therapy be helpful?
    Are there medications that might help?
    How long will treatment take?
    What can I do to help myself?
    Do you have any brochures or other printed materials that I can have?
    Are there any websites that you can recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask additional questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your health care provider or mental health provider may ask you questions, such as:

    Are you concerned about your appearance?
    When did you first begin worrying about your appearance?
    How is your daily life affected by your symptoms?
    How much time do you spend each day thinking about your appearance?
    What other treatment, if any, have you had?
    What cosmetic procedures, if any, have you had?
    What have you tried on your own to feel better or control your symptoms?
    What things make you feel worse?
    Have friends or family commented on your mood or behavior?
    Do you have any relatives who've been diagnosed with a mental health condition?
    What do you hope to gain from treatment?
    What medications, herbs or other supplements do you take?

Your health care provider or mental health provider will ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your appointment time.

Dec. 13, 2022


mayoclinic.org
Agoraphobia - Symptoms and causes
Print
7–9 minutes
Overview

Agoraphobia (ag-uh-ruh-FOE-be-uh) is a type of anxiety disorder. Agoraphobia involves fearing and avoiding places or situations that might cause panic and feelings of being trapped, helpless or embarrassed. You may fear an actual or upcoming situation. For example, you may fear using public transportation, being in open or enclosed spaces, standing in line, or being in a crowd.

The anxiety is caused by fear that there's no easy way to escape or get help if the anxiety gets overwhelming. You may avoid situations because of fears such as getting lost, falling, or having diarrhea and not being able to get to a bathroom. Most people who have agoraphobia develop it after having one or more panic attacks, causing them to worry about having another attack. They then avoid the places where it may happen again.

Agoraphobia often results in having a hard time feeling safe in any public place, especially where crowds gather and in locations that are not familiar. You may feel that you need a companion, such as a family member or friend, to go with you to public places. The fear can be so overwhelming that you may feel you can't leave your home.

Agoraphobia treatment can be challenging because it means confronting your fears. But with proper treatment — usually a form of therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy and medicines — you can escape the trap of agoraphobia and live a more enjoyable life.
Symptoms

Typical agoraphobia symptoms include fear of:

    Leaving home alone.
    Crowds or waiting in line.
    Enclosed spaces, such as movie theaters, elevators or small stores.
    Open spaces, such as parking lots, bridges or malls.
    Using public transportation, such as a bus, plane or train.

These situations cause anxiety because you fear you won't be able to escape or find help if you start to feel panicked. Or you may fear having other disabling or embarrassing symptoms, such as dizziness, fainting, falling or diarrhea.

In addition:

    Your fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger of the situation.
    You avoid the situation, you need a companion to go with you, or you endure the situation but are extremely upset.
    You have major distress or problems with social situations, work or other areas in your life because of the fear, anxiety or avoidance.
    Your fear and avoidance usually lasts six months or longer.

Panic disorder and agoraphobia

Some people have panic disorder in addition to agoraphobia. Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder that includes panic attacks. A panic attack is a sudden feeling of extreme fear that reaches a peak within a few minutes and triggers a variety of intense physical symptoms. You might think that you're totally losing control, having a heart attack or even dying.

Fear of another panic attack can lead to avoiding similar situations or the place where it happened in an attempt to prevent future panic attacks.

Symptoms of a panic attack can include:

    Rapid heart rate.
    Trouble breathing or a feeling of choking.
    Chest pain or pressure.
    Lightheadedness or dizziness.
    Feeling shaky, numb or tingling.
    Sweating too much.
    Sudden flushing or chills.
    Upset stomach or diarrhea.
    Feeling a loss of control.
    Fear of dying.

When to see a doctor

Agoraphobia can severely limit your ability to socialize, work, attend important events and even manage the details of daily life, such as running errands.

Don't let agoraphobia make your world smaller. Call your health care provider or a mental health professional if you have symptoms of agoraphobia or panic attacks.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

Biology — including health conditions and genetics — personality, stress and learning experiences may all play a role in the development of agoraphobia.
Risk factors

Agoraphobia can begin in childhood, but usually starts in the late teen or early adult years — usually before age 35. But older adults also can develop it. Females are diagnosed with agoraphobia more often than males are.

Risk factors for agoraphobia include:

    Having panic disorder or other excessive fear reactions, called phobias.
    Responding to panic attacks with too much fear and avoidance.
    Experiencing stressful life events, such as abuse, the death of a parent or being attacked.
    Having an anxious or nervous personality.
    Having a blood relative with agoraphobia.

Complications

Agoraphobia can greatly limit your life's activities. If your agoraphobia is severe, you may not even be able to leave your home. Without treatment, some people become housebound for years. If this happens to you, you may not be able to visit with family and friends, go to school or work, run errands, or take part in other routine daily activities. You may become dependent on others for help.

Agoraphobia also can lead to:

    Depression.
    Alcohol or drug misuse.
    Suicidal thoughts and behavior.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent agoraphobia. But anxiety tends to increase the more you avoid situations that you fear. If you start to have mild fears about going places that are safe, try to practice going to those places over and over again. This can help you feel more comfortable in those places. If this is too hard to do on your own, ask a family member or friend to go with you, or seek professional help.

If you experience anxiety going places or have panic attacks, get treatment as soon as possible. Get help early to keep symptoms from getting worse. Anxiety, like many other mental health conditions, can be harder to treat if you wait.

Jan. 07, 2023

mayoclinic.org
Agoraphobia - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
9–12 minutes
Diagnosis

Agoraphobia is diagnosed based on:

    Symptoms.
    In-depth interview with your health care provider or a mental health provider.
    Physical exam to rule out other conditions that could be causing your symptoms.

Treatment

Agoraphobia treatment usually includes both psychotherapy — also called talk therapy — and medicine. It may take some time, but treatment can help you get better.
Talk therapy

Talk therapy involves working with a therapist to set goals and learn practical skills to reduce your anxiety symptoms. Cognitive behavioral therapy is the most effective form of talk therapy for anxiety disorders, including agoraphobia.

Cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on teaching you specific skills to better tolerate anxiety, directly challenge your worries and gradually return to the activities you've avoided because of anxiety. Cognitive behavioral therapy is usually a short-term treatment. Through this process, your symptoms improve as you build on your initial success.

You can learn:

    What factors may trigger a panic attack or panic-like symptoms and what makes them worse.
    How to cope with and tolerate symptoms of anxiety.
    Ways to directly challenge your worries, such as whether bad things are actually likely to happen in social situations.
    That anxiety gradually decreases and that feared outcomes tend not to happen if you remain in situations long enough to learn from them.
    How to approach feared and avoided situations in a gradual, predictable, controllable and repetitive manner. Also known as exposure therapy, this is the most important part of treatment for agoraphobia.

If you have trouble leaving your home, you may wonder how you could possibly go to a therapist's office. Therapists who treat agoraphobia are aware of this problem.

If you feel homebound due to agoraphobia, look for a therapist who can help you find alternatives to office appointments, at least in the early part of treatment. The therapist may offer to see you first in your home or meet you in what you consider a safe place. Some therapists also may offer some sessions by video, over the phone or through email.

If the agoraphobia is so severe that you cannot access care, you might benefit from a more intensive hospital program that specializes in the treatment of anxiety. An intensive outpatient program usually involves going to a clinic or hospital for either a half or full day over a period of at least two weeks to work on skills to better manage your anxiety. In some cases, a residential program may be needed. This includes a stay in the hospital for a period of time while receiving treatment for severe anxiety.

You may want to take a trusted relative or friend to your appointment who can offer comfort, help and coaching, if needed.
Medicines

Certain types of antidepressants are often used to treat agoraphobia. Sometimes anti-anxiety medicines are used on a limited basis. Antidepressants are more effective than anti-anxiety medicines in the treatment of agoraphobia.

    Antidepressants. Certain antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine (Prozac) and sertraline (Zoloft), are used for the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Other types of antidepressants also may effectively treat agoraphobia. Antidepressants also are used for other mental health conditions, such as depression.
    Anti-anxiety medicine. Anti-anxiety medicines called benzodiazepines are sedatives that, in limited situations, your health care provider may prescribe to relieve anxiety symptoms. Benzodiazepines are generally used only on a short-term basis for relieving anxiety that happens suddenly, also called acute anxiety. Because they can be habit-forming, these medicines are not a good choice if you've had long-term problems with anxiety or problems with alcohol or drug misuse.

It may take weeks for medicine to help manage symptoms. And you may have to try several different medicines before you find one that works best for you.

Both starting and ending a course of antidepressants can cause side effects that create uncomfortable physical sensations or even panic attack symptoms. For this reason, your health care provider likely will gradually increase your dose during treatment, and slowly decrease your dose when you're ready to stop taking medicine.
Alternative medicine

Certain dietary and herbal supplements claim to have calming benefits that reduce anxiety. Before you take any of these for agoraphobia, talk with your health care provider. Although these supplements are available without a prescription, they still pose possible health risks.

For example, the herbal supplement kava, also called kava kava, appeared to be a promising treatment for anxiety. But there have been reports of serious liver damage, even with short-term use. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued warnings but not banned sales in the United States. Avoid any product that contains kava until more-thorough safety studies are done, especially if you have liver problems or take medicines that affect your liver.
Coping and support

Living with agoraphobia can make life difficult and very limiting. Professional treatment can help you overcome this condition or manage it well so that you don't become a prisoner to your fears.

You also can take these steps to cope and care for yourself:

    Follow your treatment plan. Keep therapy appointments. Talk regularly with your therapist. Practice and use skills learned in therapy. And take any medicines as directed.
    Try not to avoid feared situations. It can be hard to go to places or be in situations that make you uncomfortable or that bring on symptoms of anxiety. But routinely practicing going to more and more places can make them less frightening and lower your anxiety. Family, friends and your therapist can help you work on this.
    Learn calming skills. Working with your therapist, you can learn how to calm and soothe yourself. Meditation, yoga, massage and visualization are simple relaxation techniques that also may help. Practice these techniques when you aren't anxious or worried, and then put them into action during stressful situations.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. Also limit or don't have caffeine. These substances can worsen your panic or anxiety symptoms.
    Take care of yourself. Get enough sleep, be physically active every day, and eat a healthy diet, including lots of vegetables and fruits.
    Join a support group. Joining a support group for people with anxiety disorders can help you connect with others facing similar challenges and share experiences.

Preparing for your appointment

If you have agoraphobia, you may be too afraid or embarrassed to go to your health care provider's office. Consider starting with a video visit or phone call, and then work out a plan to try to meet in person. You also can ask a trusted family member or friend to go with you to your appointment.
What you can do

To get ready for your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've been experiencing, and for how long.
    Things you have stopped doing or are avoiding because of your fears.
    Key personal information, especially any major stress or life changes that you had around the time your symptoms first started.
    Medical information, including other physical or mental health conditions that you have.
    All medicines, vitamins, herbs or other supplements you're taking, and the doses.
    Questions to ask your health care provider or mental health provider so that you can make the most of your appointment.

Some basic questions to ask include:

    What do you believe is causing my symptoms?
    Are there any other possible causes?
    How will you decide on my diagnosis?
    Is my condition likely temporary or long term?
    What type of treatment do you recommend?
    I have other health problems. How best can I manage these together?
    What is the risk of side effects from the medicine that you're recommending?
    Are there options other than taking medicines?
    How soon do you expect my symptoms to improve?
    Should I see a mental health professional?
    Are there any printed materials that I can have? What websites do you suggest?

Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your health care provider or mental health provider will likely ask you a number of questions, such as:

    What symptoms do you have that concern you?
    When did you first notice these symptoms?
    When are your symptoms most likely to occur?
    Does anything seem to make your symptoms better or worse?
    Do you avoid any situations or places because you fear they'll cause symptoms?
    How are your symptoms affecting your life and the people closest to you?
    Have you been diagnosed with any medical conditions?
    Have you been treated for other mental health conditions in the past? If yes, what treatment was most helpful?
    Have you ever thought about harming yourself?
    Do you drink alcohol or use recreational drugs? How often?

Be ready to answer questions so that you'll have time to talk about what's most important to you.

Jan. 07, 2023
