(NIMH)
Depression
What is depression?
Depression (also known as major depression, major depressive disorder, or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how a person feels, thinks, and handles daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working.

To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least 2 weeks.

There are different types of depression, some of which develop due to specific circumstances.

Major depression includes symptoms of depressed mood or loss of interest, most of the time for at least 2 weeks, that interfere with daily activities.
Persistent depressive disorder (also called dysthymia or dysthymic disorder) consists of less severe symptoms of depression that last much longer, usually for at least 2 years.
Perinatal depression is depression that occurs during pregnancy or after childbirth. Depression that begins during pregnancy is prenatal depression, and depression that begins after the baby is born is postpartum depression.
Seasonal affective disorder is depression that comes and goes with the seasons, with symptoms typically starting in the late fall or early winter and going away during the spring and summer.
Depression with symptoms of psychosis is a severe form of depression in which a person experiences psychosis symptoms, such as delusions (disturbing, false fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things others do not hear or see).
People with bipolar disorder (formerly called manic depression or manic-depressive illness) also experience depressive episodes, during which they feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, combined with a very low activity level. But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences manic (or less severe hypomanic) episodes, or unusually elevated moods, in which they might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” with a marked increase in activity level.

Other depressive disorders found in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5-TR)  include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (that affects women around the time of their period).

Who gets depression?
Depression can affect people of all ages, races, ethnicities, and genders.

Women are diagnosed with depression more often than men, but men can also be depressed. Because men may be less likely to recognize, talk about, and seek help for their feelings or emotional problems, they are at greater risk of their depression symptoms being undiagnosed or undertreated.

Studies also show higher rates of depression and an increased risk for the disorder among members of the LGBTQI+ community.

What are the signs and symptoms of depression?
If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms, most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression:

Persistent sad, anxious, or “empty” mood
Feelings of hopelessness or pessimism
Feelings of irritability, frustration, or restlessness
Feelings of guilt, worthlessness, or helplessness
Loss of interest or pleasure in hobbies and activities
Fatigue, lack of energy, or feeling slowed down
Difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
Difficulty sleeping, waking too early in the morning, or oversleeping
Changes in appetite or unplanned weight changes
Physical aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems without a clear physical cause that do not go away with treatment
Thoughts of death or suicide or suicide attempts
Not everyone who is depressed experiences all these symptoms. Some people experience only a few symptoms, while others experience many. Symptoms associated with depression interfere with day-to-day functioning and cause significant distress for the person experiencing them.

Depression can also involve other changes in mood or behavior that include:

Increased anger or irritability
Feeling restless or on edge
Becoming withdrawn, negative, or detached
Increased engagement in high-risk activities
Greater impulsivity
Increased use of alcohol or drugs
Isolating from family and friends
Inability to meet the responsibilities of work and family or ignoring other important roles
Problems with sexual desire and performance
Depression can look different in men and women. Although people of all genders can feel depressed, how they express those symptoms and the behaviors they use to cope with them may differ. For example, men (as well as women) may show symptoms other than sadness, instead seeming angry or irritable. And although increased use of alcohol or drugs can be a sign of depression in anyone, men are more likely to use these substances as a coping strategy.

In some cases, mental health symptoms appear as physical problems (for example, a racing heart, tightened chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues). Men are often more likely to see a health care provider about these physical symptoms than their emotional ones.

Because depression tends to make people think more negatively about themselves and the world, some people may also have thoughts of suicide or self-harm.

Several persistent symptoms, in addition to low mood, are required for a diagnosis of depression, but people with only a few symptoms may benefit from treatment. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the person, the illness, and the stage of the illness.

If you experience signs or symptoms of depression and they persist or do not go away, talk to a health care provider. If you see signs or symptoms of depression in someone you know, encourage them to seek help from a mental health professional.

If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

What are the risk factors for depression?
Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the United States. Research suggests that genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.

Risk factors for depression can include:

Personal or family history of depression
Major negative life changes, trauma, or stress
Depression can happen at any age, but it often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although children may express more irritability or anxiety than sadness. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in childhood.

Depression, especially in midlife or older age, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, chronic pain, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present, and research suggests that people with depression and other medical illnesses tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  has also recognized that having certain mental disorders, including depression and schizophrenia, can make people more likely to get severely ill from COVID-19.

Sometimes a physical health problem, such as thyroid disease, or medications taken for an illness cause side effects that contribute to depression. A health care provider experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help determine the best treatment strategy. 

How is depression treated?
Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier treatment begins, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with psychotherapy, medication, or a combination of the two.

Some people experience treatment-resistant depression, which occurs when a person does not get better after trying at least two antidepressant medications. If treatments like psychotherapy and medication do not reduce depressive symptoms or the need for rapid relief from symptoms is urgent, brain stimulation therapy may be an option to explore.

Quick tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression, and there is no "one-size-fits-all" treatment. Finding the treatment that works best for you may take trial and error.

Psychotherapies
Several types of psychotherapy (also called talk therapy or counseling) can help people with depression by teaching them new ways of thinking and behaving and helping them change habits that contribute to depression. Evidence-based approaches to treating depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT). Learn more about psychotherapy.

The growth of telehealth for mental health services, which offers an alternative to in-person therapy, has made it easier and more convenient for people to access care in some cases. For people who may have been hesitant to look for mental health care in the past, virtual mental health care might be an easier option.

Medications
Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. They work by changing how the brain produces or uses certain chemicals involved in mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressants before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered first.

Antidepressants take time—usually 4–8 weeks—to work, and problems with sleep, appetite, and concentration often improve before mood lifts. It is important to give a medication a chance to work before deciding whether it’s right for you. Learn more about mental health medications. 

New medications, such as intranasal esketamine, can have rapidly acting antidepressant effects, especially for people with treatment-resistant depression. Esketamine is a medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  for treatment-resistant depression. Delivered as a nasal spray in a doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital, it acts rapidly, typically within a couple of hours, to relieve depression symptoms. People who use esketamine will usually continue taking an oral antidepressant to maintain the improvement in their symptoms.

Another option for treatment-resistant depression is to take an antidepressant alongside a different type of medication that may make it more effective, such as an antipsychotic or anticonvulsant medication. Further research is needed to identify the role of these newer medications in routine practice.

If you begin taking an antidepressant, do not stop taking it without talking to a health care provider. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and stop taking the medications on their own, and their depression symptoms return. When you and a health care provider have decided it is time to stop a medication, usually after a course of 9–12 months, the provider will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Abruptly stopping a medication can cause withdrawal symptoms.

Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 years may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. The FDA advises that patients of all ages taking antidepressants be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

If you are considering taking an antidepressant and are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to a health care provider about any health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child and how to weigh those risks against the benefits of available treatment options.

To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to a health care provider and visit the FDA website .

Brain stimulation therapies
If psychotherapy and medication do not reduce symptoms of depression, brain stimulation therapy may be an option to explore. There are now several types of brain stimulation therapy, some of which have been authorized by the FDA to treat depression. Other brain stimulation therapies are experimental and still being investigated for mental disorders like depression.

Although brain stimulation therapies are less frequently used than psychotherapy and medication, they can play an important role in treating mental disorders in people who do not respond to other treatments. These therapies are used for most mental disorders only after psychotherapy and medication have been tried and usually continue to be used alongside these treatments.

Brain stimulation therapies act by activating or inhibiting the brain with electricity. The electricity is given directly through electrodes implanted in the brain or indirectly through electrodes placed on the scalp. The electricity can also be induced by applying magnetic fields to the head.

The brain stimulation therapies with the largest bodies of evidence include:

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS)
Magnetic seizure therapy (MST)
Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
ECT and rTMS are the most widely used brain stimulation therapies, with ECT having the longest history of use. The other therapies are newer and, in some cases, still considered experimental. Other brain stimulation therapies may also hold promise for treating specific mental disorders.

ECT, rTMS, and VNS have authorization from the FDA to treat severe, treatment-resistant depression. They can be effective for people who have not been able to feel better with other treatments; people for whom medications cannot be used safely; and in severe cases where a rapid response is needed, such as when a person is catatonic, suicidal, or malnourished.

Additional types of brain stimulation therapy are being investigated for treating depression and other mental disorders. Talk to a health care provider and make sure you understand the potential benefits and risks before undergoing brain stimulation therapy. Learn more about these brain stimulation therapies.

Natural products
The FDA has not approved any natural products for treating depression. Although research is ongoing and findings are inconsistent, some people use natural products, including vitamin D and the herbal dietary supplement St. John’s wort, for depression. However, these products can come with risks. For instance, dietary supplements and natural products can limit the effectiveness of some medications or interact in dangerous or even life-threatening ways with them.

Do not use vitamin D, St. John’s wort, or other dietary supplements or natural products without talking to a health care provider. Rigorous studies must be conducted to test whether these and other natural products are safe and effective.

Daily morning light therapy is a common treatment choice for people with seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Light therapy devices are much brighter than ordinary indoor lighting and considered safe, except for people with certain eye diseases or taking medications that increase sensitivity to sunlight. As with all interventions for depression, evaluation, treatment, and follow-up by a health care provider are strongly recommended. Research into the potential role of light therapy in treating non-seasonal depression is ongoing.

How can I find help for depression?
A primary care provider is a good place to start if you’re looking for help. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out next steps. Find tips for talking with a health care provider about your mental health.

You can learn more about getting help on the NIMH website. You can also learn about finding support  and locating mental health services  in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website. 

Once you enter treatment, you should gradually start to feel better. Here are some other things you can do outside of treatment that may help you or a loved one feel better:

Try to get physical activity. Just 30 minutes a day of walking can boost your mood.
Try to maintain a regular bedtime and wake-up time.
Eat regular, healthy meals.
Break up large tasks into small ones; do what you can as you can. Decide what must get done and what can wait.
Try to connect with people. Talk with people you trust about how you are feeling.
Delay making important decisions, such as getting married or divorced, or changing jobs until you feel better. Discuss decisions with people who know you well.
Avoid using alcohol, nicotine, or drugs, including medications not prescribed for you


mayoclinic.org
Depression (major depressive disorder) - Symptoms and causes
Print
14–18 minutes
Overview
What is depression? A Mayo Clinic expert explains.

Learn more about depression from Craig Sawchuk, Ph.D., L.P., clinical psychologist at Mayo Clinic.

Hi, I'm Dr. Craig Sawchuk, a clinical psychologist at Mayo Clinic. And I'm here to talk with you about depression. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself, a friend, or loved one, understanding the basics of depression can help you take the next step.

What is depression?

Depression is a mood disorder that causes feelings of sadness that won't go away. Unfortunately, there's a lot of stigma around depression. Depression isn't a weakness or a character flaw. It's not about being in a bad mood, and people who experience depression can't just snap out of it. Depression is a common, serious, and treatable condition. If you're experiencing depression, you're not alone. It honestly affects people of all ages and races and biological sexes, income levels and educational backgrounds. Approximately one in six people will experience a major depressive episode at some point in their lifetime, while up to 16 million adults each year suffer from clinical depression. There are many types of symptoms that make up depression. Emotionally, you may feel sad or down or irritable or even apathetic. Physically, the body really slows down. You feel tired. Your sleep is often disrupted. It's really hard to get yourself motivated. Your thinking also changes. It can just be hard to concentrate. Your thoughts tend to be much more negative. You can be really hard on yourself, feel hopeless and helpless about things. And even in some cases, have thoughts of not wanting to live. Behaviorally, you just want to pull back and withdraw from others, activities, and day-to-day responsibilities. These symptoms all work together to keep you trapped in a cycle of depression. Symptoms of depression are different for everyone. Some symptoms may be a sign of another disorder or medical condition. That's why it's important to get an accurate diagnosis.

What causes depression?

While there's no single cause of depression, most experts believe there's a combination of biological, social, and psychological factors that contribute to depression risk. Biologically, we think about genetics or a family history of depression, health conditions such as diabetes, heart disease or thyroid disorders, and even hormonal changes that happen over the lifespan, such as pregnancy and menopause. Changes in brain chemistry, especially disruptions in neurotransmitters like serotonin, that play an important role in regulating many bodily functions, including mood, sleep, and appetite, are thought to play a particularly important role in depression. Socially stressful and traumatic life events, limited access to resources such as food, housing, and health care, and a lack of social support all contribute to depression risk. Psychologically, we think of how negative thoughts and problematic coping behaviors, such as avoidance and substance use, increase our vulnerability to depression.

The good news is that treatment helps. Effective treatments for depression exist and you do have options to see what works best for you. Lifestyle changes that improve sleep habits, exercise, and address underlying health conditions can be an important first step. Medications such as antidepressants can be helpful in alleviating depressive symptoms. Therapy, especially cognitive behavioral therapy, teaches skills to better manage negative thoughts and improve coping behaviors to help break you out of cycles of depression. Whatever the cause, remember that depression is not your fault and it can be treated.

To help diagnose depression, your health care provider may use a physical exam, lab tests, or a mental health evaluation. These results will help identify various treatment options that best fit your situation.

Help is available. You don't have to deal with depression by yourself. Take the next step and reach out. If you're hesitant to talk to a health care provider, talk to a friend or loved one about how to get help. Living with depression isn't easy and you're not alone in your struggles. Always remember that effective treatments and supports are available to help you start feeling better. Want to learn more about depression? Visit mayoclinic.org. Do take care.

Depression is a mood disorder that causes a persistent feeling of sadness and loss of interest. Also called major depressive disorder or clinical depression, it affects how you feel, think and behave and can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems. You may have trouble doing normal day-to-day activities, and sometimes you may feel as if life isn't worth living.

More than just a bout of the blues, depression isn't a weakness and you can't simply "snap out" of it. Depression may require long-term treatment. But don't get discouraged. Most people with depression feel better with medication, psychotherapy or both.
Symptoms

Although depression may occur only once during your life, people typically have multiple episodes. During these episodes, symptoms occur most of the day, nearly every day and may include:

    Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness
    Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters
    Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as sex, hobbies or sports
    Sleep disturbances, including insomnia or sleeping too much
    Tiredness and lack of energy, so even small tasks take extra effort
    Reduced appetite and weight loss or increased cravings for food and weight gain
    Anxiety, agitation or restlessness
    Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements
    Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, fixating on past failures or self-blame
    Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things
    Frequent or recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts or suicide
    Unexplained physical problems, such as back pain or headaches

For many people with depression, symptoms usually are severe enough to cause noticeable problems in day-to-day activities, such as work, school, social activities or relationships with others. Some people may feel generally miserable or unhappy without really knowing why.
Depression symptoms in children and teens

Common signs and symptoms of depression in children and teenagers are similar to those of adults, but there can be some differences.

    In younger children, symptoms of depression may include sadness, irritability, clinginess, worry, aches and pains, refusing to go to school, or being underweight.
    In teens, symptoms may include sadness, irritability, feeling negative and worthless, anger, poor performance or poor attendance at school, feeling misunderstood and extremely sensitive, using recreational drugs or alcohol, eating or sleeping too much, self-harm, loss of interest in normal activities, and avoidance of social interaction.

Depression symptoms in older adults

Depression is not a normal part of growing older, and it should never be taken lightly. Unfortunately, depression often goes undiagnosed and untreated in older adults, and they may feel reluctant to seek help. Symptoms of depression may be different or less obvious in older adults, such as:

    Memory difficulties or personality changes
    Physical aches or pain
    Fatigue, loss of appetite, sleep problems or loss of interest in sex — not caused by a medical condition or medication
    Often wanting to stay at home, rather than going out to socialize or doing new things
    Suicidal thinking or feelings, especially in older men

When to see a doctor

If you feel depressed, make an appointment to see your doctor or mental health professional as soon as you can. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, talk to a friend or loved one, any health care professional, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.
When to get emergency help

If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 in the U.S. or your local emergency number immediately.

Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:

    Call your doctor or mental health professional.
    Contact a suicide hotline.
        In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential.
        U.S. veterans or service members who are in crisis can call 988 and then press “1” for the Veterans Crisis Line. Or text 838255. Or chat online.
        The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).
    Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
    Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.

If you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you think you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
More Information

    Depression (major depressive disorder) care at Mayo Clinic
    Male depression: Understanding the issues
    Nervous breakdown: What does it mean?
    Pain and depression: Is there a link?

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

It's not known exactly what causes depression. As with many mental disorders, a variety of factors may be involved, such as:

    Biological differences. People with depression appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but may eventually help pinpoint causes.
    Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment.
    Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression. Hormone changes can result with pregnancy and during the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum) and from thyroid problems, menopause or a number of other conditions.
    Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives also have this condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.

Risk factors

Depression often begins in the teens, 20s or 30s, but it can happen at any age. More women than men are diagnosed with depression, but this may be due in part because women are more likely to seek treatment.

Factors that seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering depression include:

    Certain personality traits, such as low self-esteem and being too dependent, self-critical or pessimistic
    Traumatic or stressful events, such as physical or sexual abuse, the death or loss of a loved one, a difficult relationship, or financial problems
    Blood relatives with a history of depression, bipolar disorder, alcoholism or suicide
    Being lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, or having variations in the development of genital organs that aren't clearly male or female (intersex) in an unsupportive situation
    History of other mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorder, eating disorders or post-traumatic stress disorder
    Abuse of alcohol or recreational drugs
    Serious or chronic illness, including cancer, stroke, chronic pain or heart disease
    Certain medications, such as some high blood pressure medications or sleeping pills (talk to your doctor before stopping any medication)

Complications

Depression is a serious disorder that can take a terrible toll on you and your family. Depression often gets worse if it isn't treated, resulting in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your life.

Examples of complications associated with depression include:

    Excess weight or obesity, which can lead to heart disease and diabetes
    Pain or physical illness
    Alcohol or drug misuse
    Anxiety, panic disorder or social phobia
    Family conflicts, relationship difficulties, and work or school problems
    Social isolation
    Suicidal feelings, suicide attempts or suicide
    Self-mutilation, such as cutting
    Premature death from medical conditions

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent depression. However, these strategies may help.

    Take steps to control stress, to increase your resilience and boost your self-esteem.
    Reach out to family and friends, especially in times of crisis, to help you weather rough spells.
    Get treatment at the earliest sign of a problem to help prevent depression from worsening.
    Consider getting long-term maintenance treatment to help prevent a relapse of symptoms.

Oct. 14, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Depression (major depressive disorder) - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
22–28 minutes
Diagnosis

Your doctor may determine a diagnosis of depression based on:

    Physical exam. Your doctor may do a physical exam and ask questions about your health. In some cases, depression may be linked to an underlying physical health problem.
    Lab tests. For example, your doctor may do a blood test called a complete blood count or test your thyroid to make sure it's functioning properly.
    Psychiatric evaluation. Your mental health professional asks about your symptoms, thoughts, feelings and behavior patterns. You may be asked to fill out a questionnaire to help answer these questions.
    DSM-5. Your mental health professional may use the criteria for depression listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association.

Types of depression

Symptoms caused by major depression can vary from person to person. To clarify the type of depression you have, your doctor may add one or more specifiers. A specifier means that you have depression with specific features, such as:

    Anxious distress — depression with unusual restlessness or worry about possible events or loss of control
    Mixed features — simultaneous depression and mania, which includes elevated self-esteem, talking too much and increased energy
    Melancholic features — severe depression with lack of response to something that used to bring pleasure and associated with early morning awakening, worsened mood in the morning, major changes in appetite, and feelings of guilt, agitation or sluggishness
    Atypical features — depression that includes the ability to temporarily be cheered by happy events, increased appetite, excessive need for sleep, sensitivity to rejection, and a heavy feeling in the arms or legs
    Psychotic features — depression accompanied by delusions or hallucinations, which may involve personal inadequacy or other negative themes
    Catatonia — depression that includes motor activity that involves either uncontrollable and purposeless movement or fixed and inflexible posture
    Peripartum onset — depression that occurs during pregnancy or in the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum)
    Seasonal pattern — depression related to changes in seasons and reduced exposure to sunlight

Other disorders that cause depression symptoms

Several other disorders, such as those below, include depression as a symptom. It's important to get an accurate diagnosis, so you can get appropriate treatment.

    Bipolar I and II disorders. These mood disorders include mood swings that range from highs (mania) to lows (depression). It's sometimes difficult to distinguish between bipolar disorder and depression.
    Cyclothymic disorder. Cyclothymic (sy-kloe-THIE-mik) disorder involves highs and lows that are milder than those of bipolar disorder.
    Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. This mood disorder in children includes chronic and severe irritability and anger with frequent extreme temper outbursts. This disorder typically develops into depressive disorder or anxiety disorder during the teen years or adulthood.
    Persistent depressive disorder. Sometimes called dysthymia (dis-THIE-me-uh), this is a less severe but more chronic form of depression. While it's usually not disabling, persistent depressive disorder can prevent you from functioning normally in your daily routine and from living life to its fullest.
    Premenstrual dysphoric disorder. This involves depression symptoms associated with hormone changes that begin a week before and improve within a few days after the onset of your period, and are minimal or gone after completion of your period.
    Other depression disorders. This includes depression that's caused by the use of recreational drugs, some prescribed medications or another medical condition.

Treatment

Medications and psychotherapy are effective for most people with depression. Your primary care doctor or psychiatrist can prescribe medications to relieve symptoms. However, many people with depression also benefit from seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional.

If you have severe depression, you may need a hospital stay, or you may need to participate in an outpatient treatment program until your symptoms improve.

Here's a closer look at depression treatment options.
Medications

Many types of antidepressants are available, including those below. Be sure to discuss possible major side effects with your doctor or pharmacist.

    Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Doctors often start by prescribing an SSRI. These drugs are considered safer and generally cause fewer bothersome side effects than other types of antidepressants. SSRIs include citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram (Lexapro), fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva), sertraline (Zoloft) and vilazodone (Viibryd).
    Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). Examples of SNRIs include duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine (Pristiq, Khedezla) and levomilnacipran (Fetzima).
    Atypical antidepressants. These medications don't fit neatly into any of the other antidepressant categories. They include bupropion (Wellbutrin XL, Wellbutrin SR, Aplenzin, Forfivo XL), mirtazapine (Remeron), nefazodone, trazodone and vortioxetine (Trintellix).
    Tricyclic antidepressants. These drugs — such as imipramine (Tofranil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), amitriptyline, doxepin, trimipramine (Surmontil), desipramine (Norpramin) and protriptyline (Vivactil) — can be very effective, but tend to cause more-severe side effects than newer antidepressants. So tricyclics generally aren't prescribed unless you've tried an SSRI first without improvement.
    Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). MAOIs — such as tranylcypromine (Parnate), phenelzine (Nardil) and isocarboxazid (Marplan) — may be prescribed, typically when other drugs haven't worked, because they can have serious side effects. Using MAOIs requires a strict diet because of dangerous (or even deadly) interactions with foods — such as certain cheeses, pickles and wines — and some medications and herbal supplements. Selegiline (Emsam), a newer MAOI that sticks on the skin as a patch, may cause fewer side effects than other MAOIs do. These medications can't be combined with SSRIs.
    Other medications. Other medications may be added to an antidepressant to enhance antidepressant effects. Your doctor may recommend combining two antidepressants or adding medications such as mood stabilizers or antipsychotics. Anti-anxiety and stimulant medications also may be added for short-term use.

Finding the right medication

If a family member has responded well to an antidepressant, it may be one that could help you. Or you may need to try several medications or a combination of medications before you find one that works. This requires patience, as some medications need several weeks or longer to take full effect and for side effects to ease as your body adjusts.

Inherited traits play a role in how antidepressants affect you. In some cases, where available, results of genetic tests (done by a blood test or cheek swab) may offer clues about how your body may respond to a particular antidepressant. However, other variables besides genetics can affect your response to medication.
Risks of abruptly stopping medication

Don't stop taking an antidepressant without talking to your doctor first. Antidepressants aren't considered addictive, but sometimes physical dependence (which is different from addiction) can occur.

Stopping treatment abruptly or missing several doses can cause withdrawal-like symptoms, and quitting suddenly may cause a sudden worsening of depression. Work with your doctor to gradually and safely decrease your dose.
Antidepressants and pregnancy

If you're pregnant or breast-feeding, some antidepressants may pose an increased health risk to your unborn child or nursing child. Talk with your doctor if you become pregnant or you're planning to become pregnant.
Antidepressants and increased suicide risk

Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires all antidepressants to carry a black box warning, the strictest warning for prescriptions. In some cases, children, teenagers and young adults under age 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed.

Anyone taking an antidepressant should be watched closely for worsening depression or unusual behavior, especially when starting a new medication or with a change in dosage. If you or someone you know has suicidal thoughts when taking an antidepressant, immediately contact a doctor or get emergency help.

Keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long run by improving mood.
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy is a general term for treating depression by talking about your condition and related issues with a mental health professional. Psychotherapy is also known as talk therapy or psychological therapy.

Different types of psychotherapy can be effective for depression, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy. Your mental health professional may also recommend other types of therapies. Psychotherapy can help you:

    Adjust to a crisis or other current difficulty
    Identify negative beliefs and behaviors and replace them with healthy, positive ones
    Explore relationships and experiences, and develop positive interactions with others
    Find better ways to cope and solve problems
    Identify issues that contribute to your depression and change behaviors that make it worse
    Regain a sense of satisfaction and control in your life and help ease depression symptoms, such as hopelessness and anger
    Learn to set realistic goals for your life
    Develop the ability to tolerate and accept distress using healthier behaviors

Alternate formats for therapy

Formats for depression therapy as an alternative to face-to-face office sessions are available and may be an effective option for some people. Therapy can be provided, for example, as a computer program, by online sessions, or using videos or workbooks. Programs can be guided by a therapist or be partially or totally independent.

Before you choose one of these options, discuss these formats with your therapist to determine if they may be helpful for you. Also, ask your therapist if he or she can recommend a trusted source or program. Some may not be covered by your insurance and not all developers and online therapists have the proper credentials or training.

Smartphones and tablets that offer mobile health apps, such as support and general education about depression, are not a substitute for seeing your doctor or therapist.
Hospital and residential treatment

In some people, depression is so severe that a hospital stay is needed. This may be necessary if you can't care for yourself properly or when you're in immediate danger of harming yourself or someone else. Psychiatric treatment at a hospital can help keep you calm and safe until your mood improves.

Partial hospitalization or day treatment programs also may help some people. These programs provide the outpatient support and counseling needed to get symptoms under control.
Other treatment options

For some people, other procedures, sometimes called brain stimulation therapies, may be suggested:

    Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). In ECT, electrical currents are passed through the brain to impact the function and effect of neurotransmitters in your brain to relieve depression. ECT is usually used for people who don't get better with medications, can't take antidepressants for health reasons or are at high risk of suicide.
    Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS may be an option for those who haven't responded to antidepressants. During TMS, a treatment coil placed against your scalp sends brief magnetic pulses to stimulate nerve cells in your brain that are involved in mood regulation and depression.

More Information

    Depression (major depressive disorder) care at Mayo Clinic
    Antidepressants: Selecting one that's right for you
    Antidepressants: Side effects
    Atypical antidepressants
    Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
    Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
    Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
    Treatment-resistant depression
    Tricyclic antidepressants and tetracyclic antidepressants
    Antidepressant withdrawal: Is there such a thing?
    Antidepressants and alcohol: What's the concern?
    Antidepressants and weight gain: What causes it?
    Antidepressants: Can they stop working?
    MAOIs and diet: Is it necessary to restrict tyramine?
    Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
    Psychotherapy
    Transcranial magnetic stimulation
    Vagus nerve stimulation

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Depression generally isn't a disorder that you can treat on your own. But in addition to professional treatment, these self-care steps can help:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip psychotherapy sessions or appointments. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medications. If you stop, depression symptoms may come back, and you could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms. Recognize that it will take time to feel better.
    Learn about depression. Education about your condition can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan. Encourage your family to learn about depression to help them understand and support you.
    Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger your depression symptoms. Make a plan so that you know what to do if your symptoms get worse. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel. Ask relatives or friends to help watch for warning signs.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. It may seem like alcohol or drugs lessen depression symptoms, but in the long run they generally worsen symptoms and make depression harder to treat. Talk with your doctor or therapist if you need help with alcohol or substance use.
    Take care of yourself. Eat healthy, be physically active and get plenty of sleep. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or another activity that you enjoy. Sleeping well is important for both your physical and mental well-being. If you're having trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor about what you can do.

Alternative medicine

Alternative medicine is the use of a nonconventional approach instead of conventional medicine. Complementary medicine is a nonconventional approach used along with conventional medicine — sometimes called integrative medicine.

Make sure you understand the risks as well as possible benefits if you pursue alternative or complementary therapy. Don't replace conventional medical treatment or psychotherapy with alternative medicine. When it comes to depression, alternative treatments aren't a substitute for medical care.
Supplements

Examples of supplements that are sometimes used for depression include:

    St. John's wort. Although this herbal supplement isn't approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat depression in the U.S., it may be helpful for mild or moderate depression. But if you choose to use it, be careful — St. John's wort can interfere with a number of medications, such as heart drugs, blood-thinning drugs, birth control pills, chemotherapy, HIV/AIDS medications and drugs to prevent organ rejection after a transplant. Also, avoid taking St. John's wort while taking antidepressants because the combination can cause serious side effects.
    SAMe. Pronounced "sam-E," this dietary supplement is a synthetic form of a chemical that occurs naturally in the body. The name is short for S-adenosylmethionine (es-uh-den-o-sul-muh-THIE-o-neen). SAMe isn't approved by the FDA to treat depression in the U.S. It may be helpful, but more research is needed. SAMe may trigger mania in people with bipolar disorder.
    Omega-3 fatty acids. These healthy fats are found in cold-water fish, flaxseed, flax oil, walnuts and some other foods. Omega-3 supplements are being studied as a possible treatment for depression. While considered generally safe, in high doses, omega-3 supplements may interact with other medications. More research is needed to determine if eating foods with omega-3 fatty acids can help relieve depression.

Nutritional and dietary products aren't monitored by the FDA the same way medications are. You can't always be certain of what you're getting and whether it's safe. Also, because some herbal and dietary supplements can interfere with prescription medications or cause dangerous interactions, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking any supplements.
Mind-body connections

Integrative medicine practitioners believe the mind and body must be in harmony for you to stay healthy. Examples of mind-body techniques that may be helpful for depression include:

    Acupuncture
    Relaxation techniques such as yoga or tai chi
    Meditation
    Guided imagery
    Massage therapy
    Music or art therapy
    Spirituality
    Aerobic exercise

Relying solely on these therapies is generally not enough to treat depression. They may be helpful when used in addition to medication and psychotherapy.
Coping and support

Talk with your doctor or therapist about improving your coping skills, and try these tips:

    Simplify your life. Cut back on obligations when possible, and set reasonable goals for yourself. Give yourself permission to do less when you feel down.
    Write in a journal. Journaling, as part of your treatment, may improve mood by allowing you to express pain, anger, fear or other emotions.
    Read reputable self-help books and websites. Your doctor or therapist may be able to recommend books or websites to read.
    Locate helpful groups. Many organizations, such as the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) and the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance, offer education, support groups, counseling and other resources to help with depression. Employee assistance programs and religious groups also may offer help for mental health concerns.
    Don't become isolated. Try to participate in social activities, and get together with family or friends regularly. Support groups for people with depression can help you connect to others facing similar challenges and share experiences.
    Learn ways to relax and manage your stress. Examples include meditation, progressive muscle relaxation, yoga and tai chi.
    Structure your time. Plan your day. You may find it helps to make a list of daily tasks, use sticky notes as reminders or use a planner to stay organized.
    Don't make important decisions when you're down. Avoid decision-making when you're feeling depressed, since you may not be thinking clearly.

Preparing for your appointment

You may see your primary care doctor, or your doctor may refer you to a mental health professional. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've had, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for your appointment
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes
    All medications, vitamins or other supplements that you're taking, including dosages
    Questions to ask your doctor or mental health professional

Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember all of the information provided during the appointment.

Some basic questions to ask your doctor include:

    Is depression the most likely cause of my symptoms?
    What are other possible causes for my symptoms?
    What kinds of tests will I need?
    What treatment is likely to work best for me?
    What are the alternatives to the primary approach that you're suggesting?
    I have these other health conditions. How can I best manage them together?
    Are there any restrictions that I need to follow?
    Should I see a psychiatrist or other mental health professional?
    What are the main side effects of the medications you're recommending?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor will likely ask you a number of questions. Be ready to answer them to reserve time to go over any points you want to focus on. Your doctor may ask:

    When did you or your loved ones first notice your symptoms of depression?
    How long have you felt depressed? Do you generally always feel down, or does your mood fluctuate?
    Does your mood ever swing from feeling down to feeling intensely happy (euphoric) and full of energy?
    Do you ever have suicidal thoughts when you're feeling down?
    Do your symptoms interfere with your daily life or relationships?
    Do you have any blood relatives with depression or another mood disorder?
    What other mental or physical health conditions do you have?
    Do you drink alcohol or use recreational drugs?
    How much do you sleep at night? Does it change over time?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms?
    What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms?

Oct. 14, 2022


mayoclinic.org
Teen depression - Symptoms and causes
Print
10–13 minutes
Overview

Teen depression is a serious mental health problem that causes a persistent feeling of sadness and loss of interest in activities. It affects how your teenager thinks, feels and behaves, and it can cause emotional, functional and physical problems. Although depression can occur at any time in life, symptoms may be different between teens and adults.

Issues such as peer pressure, academic expectations and changing bodies can bring a lot of ups and downs for teens. But for some teens, the lows are more than just temporary feelings — they're a symptom of depression.

Teen depression isn't a weakness or something that can be overcome with willpower — it can have serious consequences and requires long-term treatment. For most teens, depression symptoms ease with treatment such as medication and psychological counseling.
Symptoms

Teen depression signs and symptoms include a change from the teenager's previous attitude and behavior that can cause significant distress and problems at school or home, in social activities, or in other areas of life.

Depression symptoms can vary in severity, but changes in your teen's emotions and behavior may include the examples below.
Emotional changes

Be alert for emotional changes, such as:

    Feelings of sadness, which can include crying spells for no apparent reason
    Frustration or feelings of anger, even over small matters
    Feeling hopeless or empty
    Irritable or annoyed mood
    Loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities
    Loss of interest in, or conflict with, family and friends
    Low self-esteem
    Feelings of worthlessness or guilt
    Fixation on past failures or exaggerated self-blame or self-criticism
    Extreme sensitivity to rejection or failure, and the need for excessive reassurance
    Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things
    Ongoing sense that life and the future are grim and bleak
    Frequent thoughts of death, dying or suicide

Behavioral changes

Watch for changes in behavior, such as:

    Tiredness and loss of energy
    Insomnia or sleeping too much
    Changes in appetite — decreased appetite and weight loss, or increased cravings for food and weight gain
    Use of alcohol or drugs
    Agitation or restlessness — for example, pacing, hand-wringing or an inability to sit still
    Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements
    Frequent complaints of unexplained body aches and headaches, which may include frequent visits to the school nurse
    Social isolation
    Poor school performance or frequent absences from school
    Less attention to personal hygiene or appearance
    Angry outbursts, disruptive or risky behavior, or other acting-out behaviors
    Self-harm — for example, cutting or burning
    Making a suicide plan or a suicide attempt

What's normal and what's not

It can be difficult to tell the difference between ups and downs that are just part of being a teenager and teen depression. Talk with your teen. Try to determine whether he or she seems capable of managing challenging feelings, or if life seems overwhelming.
When to see a doctor

If depression signs and symptoms continue, begin to interfere in your teen's life, or cause you to have concerns about suicide or your teen's safety, talk to a doctor or a mental health professional trained to work with adolescents. Your teen's family doctor or pediatrician is a good place to start. Or your teen's school may recommend someone.

Depression symptoms likely won't get better on their own — and they may get worse or lead to other problems if untreated. Depressed teenagers may be at risk of suicide, even if signs and symptoms don't appear to be severe.

If you're a teen and you think you may be depressed — or you have a friend who may be depressed — don't wait to get help. Talk to a health care provider such as your doctor or school nurse. Share your concerns with a parent, a close friend, a spiritual leader, a teacher or someone else you trust.
Symptoms

Suicide is often associated with depression. If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.

Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:

    Call your mental health professional.
    Contact a suicide hotline.
        In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. The Spanish language phone line is 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free). Services are free and confidential.
        Or contact a crisis service for teenagers in the U.S. called TXT 4 HELP: Text the word "safe" and your current location to 4HELP (44357) for immediate help, with the option for interactive texting.
    Seek help from your primary care doctor or other health care provider.
    Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
    Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.

If a loved one or friend is in danger of attempting suicide or has made an attempt:

    Make sure someone stays with that person.
    Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
    Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.

Never ignore comments or concerns about suicide. Always take action to get help.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

It's not known exactly what causes depression, but a variety of issues may be involved. These include:

    Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that carry signals to other parts of your brain and body. When these chemicals are abnormal or impaired, the function of nerve receptors and nerve systems changes, leading to depression.
    Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression.
    Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives — such as a parent or grandparent — also have the condition.
    Early childhood trauma. Traumatic events during childhood, such as physical or emotional abuse, or loss of a parent, may cause changes in the brain that increase the risk of depression.
    Learned patterns of negative thinking. Teen depression may be linked to learning to feel helpless — rather than learning to feel capable of finding solutions for life's challenges.

Risk factors

Many factors increase the risk of developing or triggering teen depression, including:

    Having issues that negatively impact self-esteem, such as obesity, peer problems, long-term bullying or academic problems
    Having been the victim or witness of violence, such as physical or sexual abuse
    Having other mental health conditions, such as bipolar disorder, an anxiety disorder, a personality disorder, anorexia or bulimia
    Having a learning disability or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
    Having ongoing pain or a chronic physical illness such as cancer, diabetes or asthma
    Having certain personality traits, such as low self-esteem or being overly dependent, self-critical or pessimistic
    Abusing alcohol, nicotine or other drugs
    Being gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender in an unsupportive environment

Family history and issues with family or others may also increase your teenager's risk of depression, such as:

    Having a parent, grandparent or other blood relative with depression, bipolar disorder or alcohol use problems
    Having a family member who died by suicide
    Having a family with major communication and relationship problems
    Having experienced recent stressful life events, such as parental divorce, parental military service or the death of a loved one

Complications

Untreated depression can result in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your teenager's life. Complications related to teen depression may include, for example:

    Alcohol and drug misuse
    Academic problems
    Family conflicts and relationship difficulties
    Suicide attempts or suicide

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent depression. However, these strategies may help. Encourage your teenager to:

    Take steps to control stress, increase resilience and boost self-esteem to help handle issues when they arise
    Practice self-care, for example by creating a healthy sleep routine and using electronics responsibly and in moderation
    Reach out for friendship and social support, especially in times of crisis
    Get treatment at the earliest sign of a problem to help prevent depression from worsening
    Maintain ongoing treatment, if recommended, even after symptoms let up, to help prevent a relapse of depression symptoms

Aug. 12, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Teen depression - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
16–20 minutes
Diagnosis

When teen depression is suspected, the doctor will typically do these exams and tests.

    Physical exam. The doctor may do a physical exam and ask in-depth questions about your teenager's health to determine what may be causing depression. In some cases, depression may be linked to an underlying physical health problem.
    Lab tests. For example, your teen's doctor may do a blood test called a complete blood count or test your teen's thyroid to make sure it's functioning properly.
    Psychological evaluation. A doctor or mental health professional can talk with your teen about thoughts, feelings and behavior, and may include a questionnaire. These will help pinpoint a diagnosis and check for related complications.

Types of depression

Symptoms caused by major depression can vary from person to person. To clarify the type of depression your teen has, the doctor may use one or more specifiers, which means depression with specific features. Here are a few examples:

    Anxious distress — depression with unusual restlessness or worry about possible events or loss of control
    Melancholic features — severe depression with lack of response to something that used to bring pleasure and associated with early morning awakening, worsened mood in the morning, major changes in appetite, and feelings of guilt, agitation or sluggishness
    Atypical features — depression that includes the ability to be temporarily cheered by happy events, increased appetite, excessive need for sleep, sensitivity to rejection, and a heavy feeling in arms or legs

Other disorders that cause depression symptoms

Several other disorders include depression as a symptom. An accurate diagnosis is the key to getting appropriate treatment. The doctor or mental health professional's evaluation will help determine if the symptoms of depression are caused by one of these conditions:

    Bipolar 1 and 2 disorders. These mood disorders include mood swings that range from major highs to major lows. It's sometimes difficult to distinguish between bipolar disorder and depression.
    Cyclothymic disorder. Cyclothymic (sy-kloe-THIE-mik) disorder involves highs and lows that are milder than those of bipolar disorder.
    Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. This mood disorder in children includes chronic and severe irritability and anger with frequent extreme temper outbursts. This disorder typically develops into depressive disorder or anxiety disorder during the teen years or adulthood.
    Persistent depressive disorder. Sometimes called dysthymia (dis-THIE-me-uh), this is a less severe but more chronic form of depression. While it's usually not disabling, persistent depressive disorder can prevent functioning normally in daily routines and from living life to its fullest.
    Premenstrual dysphoric disorder. This involves depression symptoms associated with hormone changes that begin a week before and improve within a few days after the onset of a menstrual period. The symptoms are minimal or gone after the period ends.
    Other causes of depression. This includes depression that's caused by the use of recreational or illegal drugs, certain prescribed medications, or a medical condition.

Treatment

Treatment depends on the type and severity of your teenager's depression symptoms. A combination of talk therapy (psychotherapy) and medication can be very effective for most teens with depression.

If your teen has severe depression or is in danger of self-harm, he or she may need a hospital stay or may need to participate in an outpatient treatment program until symptoms improve.

Here's a closer look at depression treatment options.
Medications

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved two medications for teen depression — fluoxetine (Prozac) and escitalopram (Lexapro). Talk with your teen's doctor about medication options and possible side effects, weighing the benefits and risks.
FDA alert

Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the FDA requires all antidepressants to carry a black box warning, the strictest warning for prescriptions. Though it's uncommon, some children, teens and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed.

Anyone taking an antidepressant should be watched closely for worsening depression or unusual behavior, especially when first beginning a new medication or with a change in dosage. If your teen has suicidal thoughts while taking an antidepressant, immediately contact your doctor or get emergency help.

For most teens who need an antidepressant, the benefits of taking an antidepressant outweigh any risks. Keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long run by improving mood.
Finding the right medication

Everyone's different, so finding the right medication or dose for your teen may take some trial and error. This requires patience, as some medications need several weeks or longer to take full effect and for side effects to ease as the body adjusts. Encourage your teen not to give up.
Managing medications

Carefully monitor your teen's use of medications. To work properly, antidepressants need to be taken consistently at the prescribed dose. Because overdose can be a risk for teens with depression, the doctor may prescribe only small supplies of pills at a time, or recommend that you dole out medication so that your teen does not have a large amount of pills available at once. Locking up all pills in the home is one measure families can take to reduce the risk of suicide.

If your teen has bothersome side effects, he or she shouldn't stop taking an antidepressant without talking to the doctor first. Some antidepressants can cause withdrawal symptoms unless the dose is slowly tapered off — quitting suddenly may cause a sudden worsening of depression.
Antidepressants and pregnancy

If your teen is pregnant or breastfeeding, some antidepressants may pose an increased health risk to the unborn or nursing child. If your teen becomes pregnant or plans to become pregnant, make certain your teen talks to the doctor about antidepressant medications and managing depression during pregnancy.
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy, also called psychological counseling or talk therapy, is a general term for treating depression by talking about depression and related issues with a mental health professional. Different types of psychotherapy can be effective for depression, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy.

Psychotherapy may be done one-on-one, with family members or in a group. Through regular sessions, your teen can:

    Learn about the causes of depression
    Learn how to identify and make changes in unhealthy behaviors or thoughts
    Explore relationships and experiences
    Find better ways to cope and solve problems
    Set realistic goals
    Regain a sense of happiness and control
    Help ease depression symptoms such as hopelessness and anger
    Adjust to a crisis or other current difficulty

Hospitalization and other treatment programs

In some teens, depression is so severe that a hospital stay is needed, especially if your teen is in danger of self-harm or hurting someone else. Getting psychiatric treatment at a hospital can help keep your teen calm and safe until coping skills are learned and a safety plan is developed.

Day treatment programs also may help. These programs provide the support and counseling needed while your teen gets depression symptoms under control.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Alternative medicine

Make sure that you and your teenager understand the risks as well as possible benefits if your teen pursues alternative or complementary therapy. Don't replace conventional medical treatment or psychotherapy with alternative medicine. When it comes to depression, alternative treatments aren't a good substitute for medical care.

Examples of techniques that may help in dealing with depression include:

    Acupuncture
    Relaxation techniques, such as deep breathing
    Yoga or tai chi
    Meditation
    Guided imagery
    Massage therapy
    Music or art therapy
    Spirituality

Relying solely on these methods is generally not enough to treat depression. But they may be helpful when used in addition to medication and psychotherapy.
Lifestyle and home remedies

You are your teenager's best advocate to help him or her succeed. In addition to professional treatment, here are some steps you and your teen can take that may help:

    Stick to the treatment plan. Make sure your teen attends appointments, even if he or she doesn't feel like going. Even if your teen is feeling well, make sure he or she continues to take medications as prescribed. If your teen stops taking medications, depression symptoms may come back. And quitting suddenly may cause withdrawal-like symptoms.
    Learn about depression. Education can empower your teen and motivate him or her to stick to a treatment plan. It can also benefit you and other loved ones to learn about depression and understand that it's a treatable condition.
    Encourage communication with your teen. Talk to your teen about the changes you're observing and emphasize your unconditional support. Create an environment where your teen can share concerns while you listen.
    Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your teen's doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger depression symptoms. Make a plan so that you and your teen know what to do if symptoms get worse. Ask family members or friends to help watch for warning signs.
    Help your teen adopt healthy habits. Keep healthy foods in your home, keep unhealthy foods out, and set regular mealtimes. Encourage routine exercise, noting that even light physical activity can help reduce depression symptoms. Set a time for lights out at bedtime with no use of electronic devices in bed, which can help promote quality and quantity of sleep. If your teen is having problems with sleep, ask the doctor for advice.
    Help your teen avoid alcohol and other drugs. Your teen may feel as if alcohol, marijuana or other drugs lessen depression symptoms, but in the long run they worsen symptoms and make depression harder to treat. Talk with the doctor or therapist if your teen needs help to deal with alcohol or drug use.
    Eliminate or limit access to items your teen could use for self-harm. This can include removing or securing guns, and removing sharp items, alcohol or risky medications in your home if you live with a teen who has depression.

Coping and support

Showing interest and the desire to understand your teenager's feelings lets him or her know you care. You may not understand why your teen feels hopeless or has a sense of loss or failure. But listen without judging and try to put yourself in your teen's position. Help build your teen's self-esteem by recognizing small successes and offering praise about competence.

Encourage your teen to:

    Make and keep healthy friendships. Positive relationships can help boost your teen's confidence and help him or her stay connected with others. Encourage your teen to avoid relationships with people whose attitudes or behaviors could make depression worse.
    Stay active. Participation in sports, school activities or a job can help keep your teen focused on positive things, rather than negative feelings or behaviors.
    Ask for help. Teens may be reluctant to seek support when life seems overwhelming. Encourage your teen to talk to a family member or other trusted adult whenever needed.
    Have realistic expectations. Many teens judge themselves when they aren't able to live up to unrealistic standards — academically, in athletics or in appearance, for example. Let your teen know that it's OK not to be perfect.
    Simplify life. Encourage your teen to carefully choose obligations and commitments, and set reasonable goals. Let your teen know that it's OK to do less when he or she feels down.
    Structure time. Help your teen plan activities by making lists or using a planner to stay organized. Sticking to a regular routine may help improve mood.
    Keep a private journal. Journaling may help improve your teen's mood by allowing your teen to express and work through pain, anger, fear or other emotions.
    Connect with other teens who struggle with depression. Ask the doctor or therapist if there are local support groups for teen depression. Depression support groups are offered online, but check them out to make sure they're trustworthy sites — such as the National Alliance on Mental Illness or the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance.

Preparing for your appointment

It's a good idea to be well prepared for your appointment. Here's some information to help you and your teenager get ready, and what to expect from the doctor.
What you can do

To the extent possible, involve your teenager in preparing for the appointment. Then make a list of:

    Any symptoms your teen has had, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for the appointment
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes your teen has experienced
    All medications, vitamins, herbal remedies or other supplements that your teen is taking
    Questions that you and your teen want to ask the doctor

Basic questions to ask the doctor may include:

    Is depression the most likely cause of my teen's symptoms?
    What are other possible causes for the symptoms?
    What kinds of tests will my teen need?
    What treatment is likely to work best?
    Are there any possible side effects with the medications you're recommending?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    How will we monitor progress and effectiveness of treatment?
    What are the alternatives to the primary approach that you're suggesting?
    My teen has these other health conditions. Could they be linked to depression?
    Are there any restrictions that my teen needs to follow?
    Should my teen see a psychiatrist or other mental health professional?
    Will making changes in diet, exercise or other areas help ease depression?
    Are there any printed materials that we can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your teen's doctor

Your teen's doctor or mental health professional will likely ask your teen a number of questions, including:

    When did family members or friends first notice your symptoms of depression?
    How long have you felt depressed? Do you generally always feel down, or does your mood change?
    Does your mood ever swing from feeling down to feeling extremely happy and full of energy?
    Do you ever have suicidal thoughts when you're feeling down?
    How severe are your symptoms? Do they interfere with school, relationships or other day-to-day activities?
    Do you have any blood relatives — such as a parent or grandparent — with depression or another mood disorder?
    What other mental or physical health conditions do you have?
    Are you using any mood-altering substances, such as alcohol, marijuana or recreational drugs? Do you use nicotine?
    How much do you sleep at night? Does the amount change over time?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms? What appears to worsen them?
    What is your diet like? Do you have a history of significant weight gain or loss?

The doctor or mental health professional will ask additional questions based on your teen's responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help make the most of your appointment time.

Aug. 12, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Postpartum depression - Symptoms and causes
Print
11–14 minutes
Overview

The birth of a baby can start a variety of powerful emotions, from excitement and joy to fear and anxiety. But it can also result in something you might not expect — depression.

Most new moms experience postpartum "baby blues" after childbirth, which commonly include mood swings, crying spells, anxiety and difficulty sleeping. Baby blues usually begin within the first 2 to 3 days after delivery and may last for up to two weeks.

But some new moms experience a more severe, long-lasting form of depression known as postpartum depression. Sometimes it's called peripartum depression because it can start during pregnancy and continue after childbirth. Rarely, an extreme mood disorder called postpartum psychosis also may develop after childbirth.

Postpartum depression is not a character flaw or a weakness. Sometimes it's simply a complication of giving birth. If you have postpartum depression, prompt treatment can help you manage your symptoms and help you bond with your baby.
Symptoms

Symptoms of depression after childbirth vary, and they can range from mild to severe.
Baby blues symptoms

Symptoms of baby blues — which last only a few days to a week or two after your baby is born — may include:

    Mood swings
    Anxiety
    Sadness
    Irritability
    Feeling overwhelmed
    Crying
    Reduced concentration
    Appetite problems
    Trouble sleeping

Postpartum depression symptoms

Postpartum depression may be mistaken for baby blues at first — but the symptoms are more intense and last longer. These may eventually interfere with your ability to care for your baby and handle other daily tasks. Symptoms usually develop within the first few weeks after giving birth. But they may begin earlier — during pregnancy — or later — up to a year after birth.

Postpartum depression symptoms may include:

    Depressed mood or severe mood swings
    Crying too much
    Difficulty bonding with your baby
    Withdrawing from family and friends
    Loss of appetite or eating much more than usual
    Inability to sleep, called insomnia, or sleeping too much
    Overwhelming tiredness or loss of energy
    Less interest and pleasure in activities you used to enjoy
    Intense irritability and anger
    Fear that you're not a good mother
    Hopelessness
    Feelings of worthlessness, shame, guilt or inadequacy
    Reduced ability to think clearly, concentrate or make decisions
    Restlessness
    Severe anxiety and panic attacks
    Thoughts of harming yourself or your baby
    Recurring thoughts of death or suicide

Untreated, postpartum depression may last for many months or longer.
Postpartum psychosis

With postpartum psychosis — a rare condition that usually develops within the first week after delivery — the symptoms are severe. Symptoms may include:

    Feeling confused and lost
    Having obsessive thoughts about your baby
    Hallucinating and having delusions
    Having sleep problems
    Having too much energy and feeling upset
    Feeling paranoid
    Making attempts to harm yourself or your baby

Postpartum psychosis may lead to life-threatening thoughts or behaviors and requires immediate treatment.
Postpartum depression in the other parent

Studies show that new fathers can experience postpartum depression, too. They may feel sad, tired, overwhelmed, anxious, or have changes in their usual eating and sleeping patterns. These are the same symptoms that mothers with postpartum depression experience.

Fathers who are young, have a history of depression, experience relationship problems or are struggling financially are most at risk of postpartum depression. Postpartum depression in fathers — sometimes called paternal postpartum depression — can have the same negative effect on partner relationships and child development as postpartum depression in mothers can.

If you're a partner of a new mother and are having symptoms of depression or anxiety during your partner's pregnancy or after your child's birth, talk to your health care provider. Similar treatments and supports provided to mothers with postpartum depression can help treat postpartum depression in the other parent.
When to see a doctor

If you're feeling depressed after your baby's birth, you may be reluctant or embarrassed to admit it. But if you experience any symptoms of postpartum baby blues or postpartum depression, call your primary health care provider or your obstetrician or gynecologist and schedule an appointment. If you have symptoms that suggest you may have postpartum psychosis, get help immediately.

It's important to call your provider as soon as possible if the symptoms of depression have any of these features:

    Don't fade after two weeks.
    Are getting worse.
    Make it hard for you to care for your baby.
    Make it hard to complete everyday tasks.
    Include thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.

If you have suicidal thoughts

If at any point you have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby, immediately seek help from your partner or loved ones in taking care of your baby. Call 911 or your local emergency assistance number to get help.

Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:

    Seek help from a health care provider.
    Call a mental health provider.
    Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).
    Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
    Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.

Helping a friend or loved one

People with depression may not recognize or admit that they're depressed. They may not be aware of signs and symptoms of depression. If you suspect that a friend or loved one has postpartum depression or is developing postpartum psychosis, help them seek medical attention immediately. Don't wait and hope for improvement.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

There is no single cause of postpartum depression, but genetics, physical changes and emotional issues may play a role.

    Genetics. Studies show that having a family history of postpartum depression — especially if it was major — increases the risk of experiencing postpartum depression.
    Physical changes. After childbirth, a dramatic drop in the hormones estrogen and progesterone in your body may contribute to postpartum depression. Other hormones produced by your thyroid gland also may drop sharply — which can leave you feeling tired, sluggish and depressed.
    Emotional issues. When you're sleep deprived and overwhelmed, you may have trouble handling even minor problems. You may be anxious about your ability to care for a newborn. You may feel less attractive, struggle with your sense of identity or feel that you've lost control over your life. Any of these issues can contribute to postpartum depression.

Risk factors

Any new mom can experience postpartum depression and it can develop after the birth of any child, not just the first. However, your risk increases if:

    You have a history of depression, either during pregnancy or at other times.
    You have bipolar disorder.
    You had postpartum depression after a previous pregnancy.
    You have family members who've had depression or other mood disorders.
    You've experienced stressful events during the past year, such as pregnancy complications, illness or job loss.
    Your baby has health problems or other special needs.
    You have twins, triplets or other multiple births.
    You have difficulty breastfeeding.
    You're having problems in your relationship with your spouse or partner.
    You have a weak support system.
    You have financial problems.
    The pregnancy was unplanned or unwanted.

Complications

Left untreated, postpartum depression can interfere with mother-child bonding and cause family problems.

    For mothers. Untreated postpartum depression can last for months or longer, sometimes becoming an ongoing depressive disorder. Mothers may stop breastfeeding, have problems bonding with and caring for their infants, and be at increased risk of suicide. Even when treated, postpartum depression increases a woman's risk of future episodes of major depression.
    For the other parent. Postpartum depression can have a ripple effect, causing emotional strain for everyone close to a new baby. When a new mother is depressed, the risk of depression in the baby's other parent may also increase. And these other parents may already have an increased risk of depression, whether or not their partner is affected.
    For children. Children of mothers who have untreated postpartum depression are more likely to have emotional and behavioral problems, such as sleeping and eating difficulties, crying too much, and delays in language development.

Prevention

If you have a history of depression — especially postpartum depression — tell your health care provider if you're planning on becoming pregnant or as soon as you find out you're pregnant.

    During pregnancy, your provider can monitor you closely for symptoms of depression. You may complete a depression-screening questionnaire during your pregnancy and after delivery. Sometimes mild depression can be managed with support groups, counseling or other therapies. In other cases, antidepressants may be recommended — even during pregnancy.
    After your baby is born, your provider may recommend an early postpartum checkup to screen for symptoms of postpartum depression. The earlier it's found, the earlier treatment can begin. If you have a history of postpartum depression, your provider may recommend antidepressant treatment or talk therapy immediately after delivery. Most antidepressants are safe to take while breastfeeding.

Nov. 24, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Postpartum depression - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
10–12 minutes
Diagnosis

Your health care provider will usually talk with you about your feelings, thoughts and mental health to help determine if you have a short-term case of postpartum baby blues or a more severe form of depression. Don't be embarrassed — postpartum depression is common. Share your symptoms with your provider so that you and your provider can create a useful treatment plan.

As part of your evaluation, your health care provider may do a depression screening, including having you fill out a questionnaire. Your provider may order other tests, if needed, to rule out other causes for your symptoms.
Treatment

Treatment and recovery time vary, depending on how severe your depression is and what your individual needs are. If you have an underactive thyroid or an underlying illness, your health care provider may treat those conditions or refer you to the appropriate specialist. Your health care provider may also refer you to a mental health professional.
Baby blues

The baby blues usually fade on their own within a few days to 1 to 2 weeks. In the meantime:

    Get as much rest as you can.
    Accept help from family and friends.
    Connect with other new moms.
    Create time to take care of yourself.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs, which can make mood swings worse.
    Ask your health care provider about getting help from a health professional called a lactation consultant if you're having problems with producing milk or breastfeeding.

Postpartum depression

Postpartum depression is often treated with psychotherapy — also called talk therapy or mental health counseling — medicine or both.

    Psychotherapy. It may help to talk through your concerns with a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional. Through therapy, you can find better ways to cope with your feelings, solve problems, set realistic goals and respond to situations in a positive way. Sometimes family or relationship therapy also helps. Examples of therapies used for postpartum depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal psychotherapy.
    Antidepressants. Your health care provider may recommend an antidepressant. If you're breastfeeding, any medicine you take will enter your breast milk. However, most antidepressants can be used during breastfeeding with little risk of side effects for your baby. Work with your provider to weigh the potential risks and benefits of specific antidepressants.
    Other medicines. When needed, other medicines may be added to your treatment. For example, if you have postpartum depression that includes severe anxiety or insomnia, an antianxiety medicine may be recommended for a short time.

Brexanolone (Zulresso) is the first drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration specifically for postpartum depression in adult women. Brexanolone slows the rapid drop of certain hormones after childbirth that may lead to postpartum depression. Potential serious side effects require a stay in a health care facility and monitoring by a health care provider while receiving the medicine through a vein over 60 hours. Because of this, the treatment is not yet widely available.

Research continues on an oral medicine for postpartum depression with promising results. The medicine being studied works in a way similar to brexanolone. But it could be taken daily as a pill and may not have the same serious side effects.

With appropriate treatment, postpartum depression symptoms usually improve. In some cases, postpartum depression can continue and become long term, which is called chronic depression. It's important to continue treatment after you begin to feel better. Stopping treatment too early may lead to a relapse.
Postpartum psychosis

Postpartum psychosis requires immediate treatment, usually in the hospital. Treatment may include:

    Medicines. Treatment may require a combination of medicines — such as antidepressants, antipsychotic medicines, mood stabilizers and benzodiazepines — to control your signs and symptoms.
    Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). If your postpartum depression is severe and you experience postpartum psychosis, ECT may be recommended if symptoms do not respond to medicine. ECT is a procedure in which small electrical currents are passed through the brain, intentionally starting a brief seizure. ECT seems to cause changes in brain chemistry that can reduce the symptoms of psychosis and depression, especially when other treatments have been unsuccessful.

A hospital stay during treatment for postpartum psychosis can challenge a mother's ability to breastfeed. This separation from the baby makes breastfeeding difficult. Your health care provider can recommend support for lactation — the process of producing breast milk — while you're in the hospital.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

In addition to professional treatment, you can do some things for yourself that build on your treatment plan and help speed recovery.

    Make healthy lifestyle choices. Include physical activity, such as a walk with your baby, and other forms of exercise in your daily routine. Try to get enough rest. Eat healthy foods and avoid alcohol.
    Set realistic expectations. Don't pressure yourself to do everything. Scale back your expectations for the perfect household. Do what you can and leave the rest.
    Make time for yourself. Take some time for yourself and get out of the house. That may mean asking a partner to take care of the baby or arranging for a sitter. Do something you enjoy, such as a hobby or some form of entertainment. You might also schedule some time alone with your partner or friends.
    Avoid isolation. Talk with your partner, family and friends about how you're feeling. Ask other mothers about their experiences. Breaking the isolation may help you feel human again.
    Ask for help. Try to open up to the people close to you and let them know you need help. If someone offers to babysit, take them up on it. If you can sleep, take a nap, or maybe you can see a movie or meet for coffee with friends. You may also benefit from asking for help with parenting skills that can include caregiving techniques to improve your baby's sleep and soothe fussing and crying.

Remember, taking care of your baby includes taking care of yourself.
Coping and support

The already stressful, exhausting period following a baby's birth is more difficult when depression occurs. But remember, postpartum depression is never anyone's fault. It's a common medical condition that needs treatment.

So, if you're having trouble coping with postpartum depression, talk with your health care provider. Ask your provider or a therapist about local support groups for new moms or women who have postpartum depression.

The sooner you get help, the sooner you'll be fully equipped to cope with depression and enjoy your new baby.
Preparing for your appointment

After your first appointment, your health care provider may refer you to a mental health provider who can create the right treatment plan with you. You may want to find a trusted family member or friend to join you for your appointment to help you remember all the information discussed.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've been experiencing and for how long.
    All of your medical issues, including physical health conditions or mental health conditions, such as depression.
    All the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the counter medicines, as well as vitamins, herbs and other supplements, and the doses.
    Questions to ask your provider.

Questions to ask may include:

    What is my diagnosis?
    What treatments are likely to help me?
    What are the possible side effects of the treatments you're suggesting?
    How much and how soon do you expect my symptoms to improve with treatment?
    Is the medicine you're prescribing safe to take while breastfeeding?
    How long will I need to be treated?
    What lifestyle changes can help me manage my symptoms?
    How often should I be seen for follow-up visits?
    Am I at increased risk of other mental health problems?
    Am I at risk of this condition recurring if I have another baby?
    Is there any way to prevent a recurrence if I have another baby?
    Are there any printed materials that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask any other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your health care provider or mental health provider may ask you some questions, such as:

    What are your symptoms, and when did they start?
    Have your symptoms been getting better or worse over time?
    Are your symptoms affecting your ability to care for your baby?
    Do you feel as bonded to your baby as you expected?
    Are you able to sleep when you have the chance and get out of bed when it's time to wake up?
    How would you describe your energy level?
    Has your appetite changed?
    How often would you say you feel anxious, irritable or angry?
    Have you had any thoughts of harming yourself or your baby?
    How much support do you have in caring for your baby?
    Are there other major stressors in your life, such as financial or relationship problems?
    Have you been diagnosed with any other medical conditions?
    Have you ever been diagnosed with any mental health conditions, such as depression or bipolar disorder? If so, what type of treatment helped the most?

Your provider may ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing for questions will help you make the most of your appointment.

Nov. 24, 2022
Overview

Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a type of depression that's related to changes in seasons — seasonal affective disorder (SAD) begins and ends at about the same times every year. If you're like most people with SAD, your symptoms start in the fall and continue into the winter months, sapping your energy and making you feel moody. These symptoms often resolve during the spring and summer months. Less often, SAD causes depression in the spring or early summer and resolves during the fall or winter months.

Treatment for SAD may include light therapy (phototherapy), psychotherapy and medications.

Don't brush off that yearly feeling as simply a case of the "winter blues" or a seasonal funk that you have to tough out on your own. Take steps to keep your mood and motivation steady throughout the year.

Products & Services

Symptoms

In most cases, seasonal affective disorder symptoms appear during late fall or early winter and go away during the sunnier days of spring and summer. Less commonly, people with the opposite pattern have symptoms that begin in spring or summer. In either case, symptoms may start out mild and become more severe as the season progresses.

Signs and symptoms of SAD may include:

    Feeling listless, sad or down most of the day, nearly every day
    Losing interest in activities you once enjoyed
    Having low energy and feeling sluggish
    Having problems with sleeping too much
    Experiencing carbohydrate cravings, overeating and weight gain
    Having difficulty concentrating
    Feeling hopeless, worthless or guilty
    Having thoughts of not wanting to live

Fall and winter SAD

Symptoms specific to winter-onset SAD, sometimes called winter depression, may include:

    Oversleeping
    Appetite changes, especially a craving for foods high in carbohydrates
    Weight gain
    Tiredness or low energy

Spring and summer SAD

Symptoms specific to summer-onset seasonal affective disorder, sometimes called summer depression, may include:

    Trouble sleeping (insomnia)
    Poor appetite
    Weight loss
    Agitation or anxiety
    Increased irritability

Seasonal changes and bipolar disorder

People who have bipolar disorder are at increased risk of seasonal affective disorder. In some people with bipolar disorder, episodes of mania may be linked to a specific season. For example, spring and summer can bring on symptoms of mania or a less intense form of mania (hypomania), anxiety, agitation and irritability. They may also experience depression during the fall and winter months.

When to see a doctor

It's normal to have some days when you feel down. But if you feel down for days at a time and you can't get motivated to do activities you normally enjoy, see your health care provider. This is especially important if your sleep patterns and appetite have changed, you turn to alcohol for comfort or relaxation, or you feel hopeless or think about suicide.

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.

Causes

The specific cause of seasonal affective disorder remains unknown. Some factors that may come into play include:

    Your biological clock (circadian rhythm). The reduced level of sunlight in fall and winter may cause winter-onset SAD. This decrease in sunlight may disrupt your body's internal clock and lead to feelings of depression.
    Serotonin levels. A drop in serotonin, a brain chemical (neurotransmitter) that affects mood, might play a role in SAD. Reduced sunlight can cause a drop in serotonin that may trigger depression.
    Melatonin levels. The change in season can disrupt the balance of the body's level of melatonin, which plays a role in sleep patterns and mood.

Risk factors

Seasonal affective disorder is diagnosed more often in women than in men. And SAD occurs more frequently in younger adults than in older adults.

Factors that may increase your risk of seasonal affective disorder include:

    Family history. People with SAD may be more likely to have blood relatives with SAD or another form of depression.
    Having major depression or bipolar disorder. Symptoms of depression may worsen seasonally if you have one of these conditions.
    Living far from the equator. SAD appears to be more common among people who live far north or south of the equator. This may be due to decreased sunlight during the winter and longer days during the summer months.
    Low level of vitamin D. Some vitamin D is produced in the skin when it's exposed to sunlight. Vitamin D can help to boost serotonin activity. Less sunlight and not getting enough vitamin D from foods and other sources may result in low levels of vitamin D in the body.

Complications

Take signs and symptoms of seasonal affective disorder seriously. As with other types of depression, SAD can get worse and lead to problems if it's not treated. These can include:

    Social withdrawal
    School or work problems
    Substance abuse
    Other mental health disorders such as anxiety or eating disorders
    Suicidal thoughts or behavior

Prevention

There's no known way to prevent the development of seasonal affective disorder. However, if you take steps early on to manage symptoms, you may be able to prevent them from getting worse over time. You may be able to head off serious changes in mood, appetite and energy levels, as you can predict the time of the year in which these symptoms may start. Treatment can help prevent complications, especially if SAD is diagnosed and treated before symptoms get bad.

Some people find it helpful to begin treatment before symptoms would normally start in the fall or winter, and then continue treatment past the time symptoms would normally go away. Other people need continuous treatment to prevent symptoms from returning.

Diagnosis

Even with a thorough evaluation, it can sometimes be difficult for your health care provider or mental health professional to diagnose seasonal affective disorder because other types of depression or other mental health conditions can cause similar symptoms.

To help diagnose seasonal affective disorder (SAD), a thorough evaluation generally includes:

    Physical exam. Your health care provider may do a physical exam and ask in-depth questions about your health. In some cases, depression may be linked to an underlying physical health problem.
    Lab tests. For example, your health care provider may do a blood test called a complete blood count (CBC) or test your thyroid to make sure it's functioning properly.
    Psychological evaluation. To check for signs of depression, your health care provider or mental health professional asks about your symptoms, thoughts, feelings and behavior patterns. You may fill out a questionnaire to help answer these questions.

Treatment

Treatment for seasonal affective disorder may include light therapy, psychotherapy and medications. If you have bipolar disorder, tell your health care provider and mental health professional — this is critical to know when prescribing light therapy or an antidepressant. Both treatments can potentially trigger a manic episode.
Light therapy

In light therapy, also called phototherapy, you sit a few feet from a special light box so that you're exposed to bright light within the first hour of waking up each day. Light therapy mimics natural outdoor light and appears to cause a change in brain chemicals linked to mood.

Light therapy is one of the first line treatments for fall-onset . It generally starts working in a few days to a few weeks and causes very few side effects. Research on light therapy is limited, but it appears to be effective for most people in relieving symptoms.

Before you purchase a light box, talk with your health care provider about the best one for you, and familiarize yourself with the variety of features and options so that you buy a high-quality product that's safe and effective. Also ask about how and when to use the light box.
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy, also called talk therapy, is another option to treat . A type of psychotherapy known as cognitive behavioral therapy can help you:

    Learn healthy ways to cope with , especially with reducing avoidance behavior and scheduling meaningful activities
    Identify and change negative thoughts and behaviors that may be making you feel worse
    Learn how to manage stress
    Build in healthy behaviors, such as increasing physical activity and improving your sleep patterns

Medications

Some people with benefit from antidepressant treatment, especially if symptoms are severe.

An extended-release version of the antidepressant bupropion (Wellbutrin XL, Aplenzin) may help prevent depressive episodes in people with a history of . Other antidepressants also may commonly be used to treat .

Your health care provider may recommend starting treatment with an antidepressant before your symptoms typically begin each year. He or she may also recommend that you continue to take the antidepressant beyond the time your symptoms normally go away.

Keep in mind that it may take several weeks to notice full benefits from an antidepressant. In addition, you may have to try different medications before you find one that works well for you and has the fewest side effects.

elf care

In addition to your treatment plan for seasonal affective disorder:

    Make your environment sunnier and brighter. Open blinds, trim tree branches that block sunlight or add skylights to your home. Sit closer to bright windows while at home or in the office.
    Get outside. Take a long walk, eat lunch at a nearby park, or simply sit on a bench and soak up the sun. Even on cold or cloudy days, outdoor light can help — especially if you spend some time outside within two hours of getting up in the morning.
    Exercise regularly. Exercise and other types of physical activity help relieve stress and anxiety, both of which can increase symptoms. Being more fit can make you feel better about yourself, too, which can lift your mood.
    Normalize sleep patterns. Schedule reliable times to wake up and go to bed each day. Especially for fall-winter-onset , reduce or eliminate napping and oversleeping.

More Information

    Seasonal affective disorder treatment: Choosing a light box

Alternative medicine

Certain herbal remedies, supplements or mind-body techniques are sometimes used to try to relieve depression symptoms, though it's not clear how effective these treatments are for seasonal affective disorder.

Herbal remedies and dietary supplements aren't monitored by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the same way medications are, so you can't always be certain of what you're getting and whether it's safe. Also, because some herbal and dietary supplements can interfere with prescription medications or cause dangerous interactions, talk to your health care provider or pharmacist before taking any supplements.

Make sure you understand the risks as well as possible benefits if you pursue alternative or complementary therapy. When it comes to depression, alternative treatments aren't a substitute for medical care.
Coping and support

These steps can help you manage seasonal affective disorder:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Follow your treatment plan and attend therapy appointments when scheduled.
    Take care of yourself. Get enough sleep to help you feel rested, but be careful not to get too much rest, as symptoms often lead people to feel like hibernating. Participate in an exercise program or engage in another form of regular physical activity. Make healthy choices for meals and snacks. Don't turn to alcohol or recreational drugs for relief.
    Practice stress management. Learn techniques to manage your stress better. For example, you may try relaxation techniques such as yoga, tai chi and meditation. Unmanaged stress can lead to depression, overeating, or other unhealthy thoughts and behaviors.
    Socialize. When you're feeling down, it can be hard to be social. Make an effort to connect with people you enjoy being around. They can offer support, a shoulder to cry on or shared laughter to give you a little boost.
    Take a trip. If possible, take winter vacations in sunny, warm locations if you have winter or to cooler locations if you have summer .

Preparing for your appointment

You may start by seeing your health care provider or a mental health professional such as a psychiatrist or psychologist.

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Your symptoms, such as feeling down, having a lack of energy, excess sleeping and appetite changes
    Your depression patterns, such as when your depression starts and what seems to make it better or worse
    Any other mental or physical health problems you have — both can affect mood
    Any major stressors or life changes you've had recently
    All medications, vitamins, herbs or other supplements you're taking, including dosages
    Questions to ask your health care provider or mental health professional

Some basic questions to ask may include:

    Are my symptoms likely caused by , or could they be due to something else?
    What else could be causing or worsening my symptoms of depression?
    What are the best treatment options?
    Would using a light box help my symptoms?
    Are there any restrictions that I need to follow or steps I should take to help improve my mood?
    Should I see a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional?
    Are medications likely to improve my symptoms?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medication you're prescribing me?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your health care provider or mental health professional is likely to ask you a number of questions, such as:

    What are your symptoms?
    When did you first begin having symptoms?
    Have your symptoms been continuous or occasional?
    How do your symptoms impact your daily activities?
    What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms?
    What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms?
    Do you have any other physical or mental health conditions?
    Are you taking any medications, supplements or herbal remedies?
    Do you use alcohol or recreational drugs?
    Do any of your blood relatives have or another mental health condition?

Your health care provider or mental health professional will ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your appointment time.


mayoclinic.org
Persistent depressive disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
7–9 minutes
Overview

Persistent depressive disorder is a continuous, long-term form of depression. You may feel sad and empty, lose interest in daily activities and have trouble getting things done. You may also have low self-esteem, feel like a failure and feel hopeless. These feelings last for years and may interfere with your relationships, school, work and daily activities.

If you have persistent depressive disorder, you may find it hard to be upbeat even on happy occasions. You may be described as having a gloomy personality, constantly complaining or not able to have fun. Persistent depressive disorder is not as severe as major depression, but your current depressed mood may be mild, moderate or severe.

Because persistent depressive disorder is long term, coping with depression symptoms can be challenging. A combination of talk therapy and medicine can be effective in treating this condition.
Symptoms

Persistent depressive disorder symptoms usually come and go over a period of years. The intensity of symptoms can change over time. But symptoms usually don't disappear for more than two months at a time. Also, major depression episodes may occur before or during persistent depressive disorder.

Symptoms of persistent depressive disorder can cause major problems in your life and may include:

    Sadness, emptiness or feeling down.
    Loss of interest in daily activities.
    Tiredness and lack of energy.
    Low self-esteem, self-criticism or feeling you're not capable.
    Trouble focusing clearly and trouble making decisions.
    Problems getting things done well and on time.
    Quickly becoming annoyed, impatient or angry.
    Avoidance of social activities.
    Feelings of guilt and worries over the past.
    Poor appetite or overeating.
    Sleep problems.
    Hopelessness.

In children, symptoms of persistent depressive disorder may include depressed mood and being irritable, which means easily becoming annoyed, impatient or angry.
When to see a doctor

If these feelings have been going on for a long time, you may think they'll always be part of your life. But if you have any symptoms of persistent depressive disorder, seek medical help.

Talk to your health care provider about your symptoms or seek help from a mental health professional. Or you can reach out to someone else who may be able to help guide you to treatment. This could be a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or another person you trust.

If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 in the U.S. or your local emergency number immediately. Or contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 888-628-9454 (toll-free).
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

The exact cause of persistent depressive disorder is not known. As with major depression, it may involve more than one cause, such as:

    Biological differences. People with persistent depressive disorder may have physical changes in their brains. It's not clear how these changes affect the disorder, but they may eventually help determine the causes.
    Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals. Research indicates that changes in neurotransmitters may play a large part in depression and its treatment.
    Inherited traits. Persistent depressive disorder appears to be more common in people whose blood relatives also have the condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.
    Life events. As with major depression, traumatic events such as the loss of a loved one, financial problems or a high level of stress can trigger persistent depressive disorder in some people.

Risk factors

Persistent depressive disorder often begins early — in childhood, the teen years or young adult life — and continues for a long time. Certain factors appear to increase the risk of developing persistent depressive disorder, including:

    Having a first-degree blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, with major depressive disorder or other depressive disorders.
    Traumatic or stressful life events, such as the loss of a loved one or major financial problems.
    Personality traits that include negativity, such as low self-esteem, being too dependent or self-critical, or always thinking the worst will happen.
    History of other mental health disorders, such as a personality disorder.

Complications

Conditions that may be linked with persistent depressive disorder include:

    Lower quality of life.
    Major depression, anxiety disorders and other mood disorders.
    Substance misuse.
    Relationship difficulties and family conflicts.
    School or work problems and trouble getting things done.
    Continuing pain and general medical illnesses.
    Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
    Personality disorders or other mental health disorders.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent persistent depressive disorder. Because it often starts in childhood or during the teenage years, identifying children at risk of the condition may help them get early treatment.

Strategies that may help reduce or prevent symptoms include the following:

    Take steps to control stress, to increase your ability to recover from problems — which is called resilience — and to boost your self-esteem.
    Reach out to family and friends, especially in times of crisis, to help you get through rough spells.
    Get treatment at the earliest sign of a problem to help prevent symptoms from worsening.
    Consider getting long-term treatment to help prevent a relapse of symptoms.

Dec. 02, 2022



mayoclinic.org
Persistent depressive disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
11–14 minutes
Diagnosis

If your health care provider thinks that you may have persistent depressive disorder, exams and tests may include:

    Physical exam. Your health care provider may do a physical exam and ask in-depth questions about your health to determine what may be causing your depression. In some cases, it may be linked to an underlying physical health problem.
    Lab tests. Your provider may recommend lab tests to rule out other medical conditions that may cause depressive symptoms. For example, you may have a blood test to find out whether your thyroid is not making enough thyroid hormone, which is called hypothyroidism.
    Psychological evaluation. This includes talking about your thoughts, feelings and behavior. It may include completing a questionnaire. This evaluation can help determine if you have persistent depressive disorder or another condition that can affect mood, such as major depression, bipolar disorder or seasonal affective disorder.

For a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder, the main indication for an adult differs somewhat from that of a child:

    For an adult, depressed mood occurs most of the day for two or more years.
    For a child, depressed mood or irritability occurs most of the day for at least one year.

Symptoms caused by persistent depressive disorder can vary from person to person. When persistent depressive disorder starts before age 21, it's called early onset. If it starts at age 21 or older, it's called late onset.
Treatment

The two main treatments for persistent depressive disorder are medicines and talk therapy. What your health care provider recommends depends on factors such as:

    How severe your symptoms are.
    Your desire to explore emotional or other issues affecting your life.
    Previous treatment methods.
    Your ability to tolerate medicines.
    Other emotional problems you may have.
    What type of treatment you prefer.

Talk therapy may be the first option suggested for children and teenagers with persistent depressive disorder, but that depends on the individual. Sometimes antidepressants also are needed.
Medicines

The types of antidepressants most commonly used to treat persistent depressive disorder include:

    Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
    Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
    Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)

Talk with your health care provider or pharmacist about possible side effects.
Finding the right medicine

You may need to try several medicines or a combination before you find one that works. This requires patience. Some medicines take several weeks or longer for full effect. It can also take this long for side effects to ease as your body adjusts.

Don't stop taking an antidepressant without talking to your health care provider. When it's time, your provider can help you gradually and safely decrease your dose. Stopping treatment suddenly or missing several doses may cause withdrawal-like symptoms. And quitting a medicine suddenly may cause depression to quickly get worse.

When you have persistent depressive disorder, you may need to take antidepressants long term to keep symptoms under control.
Antidepressants and pregnancy

If you're pregnant or breastfeeding, some antidepressants may pose an increased health risk to your unborn baby or nursing child. Talk to your health care provider if you become pregnant or are planning on becoming pregnant.
FDA alert on antidepressants

Antidepressants are generally safe when taken as directed. But the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires all antidepressants to carry a warning: In some cases, children, teens and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This may be more of a risk in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. So watch closely for worsening depression or unusual behavior during these times.

If your teen or young adult has suicidal thoughts while taking an antidepressant, immediately contact a health care provider or mental health provider or get emergency help. Keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long term by improving mood.
Talk therapy

Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy, is a general term for treating depression by talking with a mental health provider about your thoughts, feelings, behavior, relationships and related issues.

Different types of psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, can be effective for persistent depressive disorder. You and your therapist can discuss your goals for therapy and other issues, such as the length of treatment.

Talk therapy can help you:

    Adjust to a crisis or other current difficulty.
    Identify issues that contribute to your depression and change behaviors that make it worse.
    Identify negative beliefs and behaviors and replace them with healthy, positive ones.
    Find better ways to cope with and solve problems.
    Explore relationships and experiences, and develop positive interactions with others.
    Regain a sense of satisfaction and control in your life and help ease depression symptoms, such as hopelessness and anger.
    Learn to set realistic goals for your life.

Lifestyle and home remedies

Persistent depressive disorder generally is not a condition that you can treat on your own. But along with professional treatment, these self-care steps can help:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions or appointments. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medicine. Give yourself time to improve gradually.
    Learn about persistent depressive disorder. Education about your condition can empower you and motivate you to follow your treatment plan. Encourage your family to learn about the disorder to help them understand and support you.
    Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your health care provider or therapist to learn what might trigger your symptoms. Make a plan so that you know what to do if symptoms get worse or return. Contact your health care provider or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel. Consider involving family members or friends to watch for warning signs.
    Take care of yourself. Eat a healthy diet, be physically active and get plenty of sleep. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or another activity that you enjoy. Sleeping well is important for both physical and mental well-being. If you're having trouble sleeping, ask your provider what you can do.
    Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. It may seem like alcohol or drugs lessen depression-related symptoms. But over time, they generally worsen depression and make it harder to treat. Talk with your provider or therapist if you need help dealing with alcohol or drug use.

Alternative medicine

Make sure you understand the risks as well as the possible benefits if you decide to use alternative or complementary therapy. Avoid replacing conventional medical treatment or talk therapy with alternative medicine. When it comes to depression, alternative treatments are not a substitute for medical care.

For example, the herbal supplement called St. John's wort is not approved by the FDA to treat depression in the U.S., though it's available. It may help improve mild or moderate depression, but the overall evidence is not conclusive.

St. John's wort can interfere with a number of medicines, including blood-thinning drugs, birth control pills, chemotherapy, HIV/AIDS medicines and drugs to prevent organ rejection after a transplant. Also, avoid taking St. John's wort while taking antidepressants because the combination can cause serious side effects.
The FDA does not monitor supplements

Unlike medicines, dietary supplements aren't approved and monitored by the FDA. You can't always be certain of what you're getting and whether it's safe. Some herbal and other dietary supplements can interfere with prescription medicines or cause dangerous interactions. Talk to your health care provider before taking any supplements.
Coping and support

Persistent depressive disorder makes it hard to engage in behavior and activities that can help you feel better. In addition to the treatments recommended by your doctor or therapist, consider these tips:

    Focus on your goals. Dealing with persistent depressive disorder is an ongoing process. Set reasonable goals for yourself. Stay motivated by keeping your goals in mind. But give yourself permission to do less when you feel down.
    Simplify your life. Cut back on obligations when possible. Structure your time by planning your day. You may find it helps to make a list of daily tasks, use sticky notes as reminders or use a planner to stay organized.
    Write in a journal. Journaling as part of your treatment may improve mood by allowing you to express pain, anger, fear or other emotions.
    Read reputable self-help books and websites. Ask your doctor or therapist to recommend books or websites to read.
    Stay connected. Don't become isolated. Try to participate in social activities, and get together with family or friends regularly. Support groups for people with depression can help you connect with others facing similar challenges and share experiences.
    Learn ways to relax and manage your stress. Examples include meditation, progressive muscle relaxation, yoga and tai chi.
    Don't make important decisions when you're down. Avoid decision-making when you're feeling depressed, since you may not be thinking clearly.

Preparing for your appointment

You may decide to schedule an appointment with your primary health care provider to talk about your concerns. Or you may decide to see a mental health provider, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, for evaluation.

You may choose to take a family member or friend along to help you remember something that you missed or forgot.
What you can do

Prepare for your appointment by making a list of:

    Any symptoms you've had, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for the appointment.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    All medicines, vitamins, supplements or herbal preparations that you're taking, and the doses.
    Questions to ask your health care provider.

Basic questions to ask may include:

    Why can't I get over this depression on my own?
    How do you treat this type of depression?
    Will talk therapy help?
    Is there a medicine that might help?
    How long will I need to take the medicine?
    What are some of the side effects of the medicine that you're recommending?
    How often will we meet?
    How long will treatment take?
    What can I do to help myself?
    Are there any brochures or other printed materials that I can have?
    What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your provider may ask you several questions, such as:

    When did you first notice symptoms?
    How is your daily life affected by your symptoms?
    What other treatment have you had?
    What have you tried on your own to feel better?
    What things make you feel worse?
    Have any relatives had any type of depression or another mental health disorder?
    What do you hope to gain from treatment?

Your health care provider or mental health provider will ask more questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Prepare and anticipate questions to make the most of your appointment time.

Dec. 02, 2022
