NIMH
Eating Disorders
What are eating disorders?
There is a commonly held misconception that eating disorders are a lifestyle choice. Eating disorders are actually serious and often fatal illnesses that are associated with severe disturbances in people’s eating behaviors and related thoughts and emotions. Preoccupation with food, body weight, and shape may also signal an eating disorder. Common eating disorders include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder.

What are the signs and symptoms of eating disorders?
Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is a condition where people avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They also may weigh themselves repeatedly. Even when dangerously underweight, they may see themselves as overweight.

There are two subtypes of anorexia nervosa: a "restrictive" subtype and a "binge-purge" subtype.

In the restrictive subtype of anorexia nervosa, people severely limit the amount and type of food they consume.
In the binge-purge subtype of anorexia nervosa, people also greatly restrict the amount and type of food they consume. In addition, they may have binge-eating and purging episodes—eating large amounts of food in a short time followed by vomiting or using laxatives or diuretics to get rid of what was consumed.
Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. It has an extremely high death (mortality) rate compared with other mental disorders. People with anorexia are at risk of dying from medical complications associated with starvation. Suicide is the second leading cause of death for people diagnosed with anorexia nervosa.

If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

Symptoms include:

Extremely restricted eating
Extreme thinness (emaciation)
A relentless pursuit of thinness and unwillingness to maintain a normal or healthy weight
Intense fear of gaining weight
Distorted body image, a self-esteem that is heavily influenced by perceptions of body weight and shape, or a denial of the seriousness of low body weight
Other symptoms may develop over time, including:

Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis)
Mild anemia and muscle wasting and weakness
Brittle hair and nails
Dry and yellowish skin
Growth of fine hair all over the body (lanugo)
Severe constipation
Low blood pressure
Slowed breathing and pulse
Damage to the structure and function of the heart
Brain damage
Multiorgan failure
Drop in internal body temperature, causing a person to feel cold all the time
Lethargy, sluggishness, or feeling tired all the time
Infertility
Bulimia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is a condition where people have recurrent and frequent episodes of eating unusually large amounts of food and feeling a lack of control over these episodes. This binge-eating is followed by behavior that compensates for the overeating such as forced vomiting, excessive use of laxatives or diuretics, fasting, excessive exercise, or a combination of these behaviors. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or over overweight.

Symptoms include:

Chronically inflamed and sore throat
Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area
Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth as a result of exposure to stomach acid
Acid reflux disorder and other gastrointestinal problems
Intestinal distress and irritation from laxative abuse
Severe dehydration from purging of fluids
Electrolyte imbalance (too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium, and other minerals) which can lead to stroke or heart attack
Binge-eating disorder
Binge-eating disorder is a condition where people lose control over their eating and have reoccurring episodes of eating unusually large amounts of food. Unlike bulimia nervosa, periods of binge-eating are not followed by purging, excessive exercise, or fasting. As a result, people with binge-eating disorder often are overweight or obese. Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S.

Symptoms include:

Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour period
Eating even when you're full or not hungry
Eating fast during binge episodes
Eating until you're uncomfortably full
Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment
Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eating
Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss
Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder
Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), previously known as selective eating disorder, is a condition where people limit the amount or type of food eaten. Unlike anorexia nervosa, people with ARFID do not have a distorted body image or extreme fear of gaining weight. ARFID is most common in middle childhood and usually has an earlier onset than other eating disorders. Many children go through phases of picky eating, but a child with ARFID does not eat enough calories to grow and develop properly, and an adult with ARFID does not eat enough calories to maintain basic body function.

Symptoms include:

Dramatic restriction of types or amount of food eaten
Lack of appetite or interest in food
Dramatic weight loss
Upset stomach, abdominal pain, or other gastrointestinal issues with no other known cause
Limited range of preferred foods that becomes even more limited (“picky eating” that gets progressively worse)
What are the risk factors for eating disorders?
Eating disorders can affect people of all ages, racial/ethnic backgrounds, body weights, and genders. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood but may also develop during childhood or later in life.

Researchers are finding that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors. Researchers are using the latest technology and science to better understand eating disorders.

One approach involves the study of human genes. Eating disorders run in families. Researchers are working to identify DNA variations that are linked to the increased risk of developing eating disorders.

Brain imaging studies are also providing a better understanding of eating disorders. For example, researchers have found differences in patterns of brain activity in women with eating disorders in comparison with healthy women. This kind of research can help guide the development of new means of diagnosis and treatment of eating disorders.

How are eating disorders treated?
It is important to seek treatment early for eating disorders. People with eating disorders are at higher risk for suicide and medical complications. People with eating disorders can often have other mental disorders (such as depression or anxiety) or problems with substance use. Complete recovery is possible.

Treatment plans are tailored to individual needs and may include one or more of the following:

Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy
Medical care and monitoring
Nutritional counseling
Medications
Psychotherapies
Family-based therapy, a type of psychotherapy where parents of adolescents with anorexia nervosa assume responsibility for feeding their child, appears to be very effective in helping people gain weight and improve eating habits and moods.

To reduce or eliminate binge-eating and purging behaviors, people may undergo cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which is another type of psychotherapy that helps a person learn how to identify distorted or unhelpful thinking patterns and recognize and change inaccurate beliefs.

Medication
Evidence also suggests that medications such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers may also be helpful for treating eating disorders and other co-occurring illnesses such as anxiety or depression. The Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) website  has the latest information on medication approvals, warnings, and patient information guides.


mayoclinic.org
Eating disorders - Symptoms and causes
Print
14–17 minutes
Overview

Eating disorders are serious health conditions that affect both your physical and mental health. These conditions include problems in how you think about food, eating, weight and shape, and in your eating behaviors. These symptoms can affect your health, your emotions and your ability to function in important areas of life.

If not treated effectively, eating disorders can become long-term problems and, in some cases, can cause death. The most common eating disorders are anorexia, bulimia and binge-eating disorder.

Most eating disorders involve focusing too much on weight, body shape and food. This can lead to dangerous eating behaviors. These behaviors can seriously affect the ability to get the nutrition your body needs. Eating disorders can harm the heart, digestive system, bones, teeth and mouth. They can lead to other diseases. They're also linked with depression, anxiety, self-harm, and suicidal thoughts and behaviors.

With proper treatment, you can return to healthier eating habits and learn healthier ways to think about food and your body. You also may be able to reverse or reduce serious problems caused by the eating disorder.
Symptoms

Symptoms vary, depending on the type of eating disorder. Anorexia, bulimia and binge-eating disorder are the most common eating disorders. People with eating disorders can have all different body types and sizes.
Anorexia

Anorexia (an-o-REK-see-uh), also called anorexia nervosa, can be a life-threatening eating disorder. It includes an unhealthy low body weight, intense fear of gaining weight, and a view of weight and shape that is not realistic. Anorexia often involves using extreme efforts to control weight and shape, which often seriously interfere with health and daily life.

Anorexia may include severely limiting calories or cutting out certain kinds of foods or food groups. It may involve other methods to lose weight, such as exercising too much, using laxatives or diet aids, or vomiting after eating. Efforts to reduce weight can cause severe health problems, even for those who continue eating throughout the day or whose weight isn't extremely low.
Bulimia

Bulimia (buh-LEE-me-uh), also called bulimia nervosa, is a serious, sometimes life-threatening eating disorder. Bulimia includes episodes of bingeing, commonly followed by episodes of purging. Sometimes bulimia also includes severely limiting eating for periods of time. This often leads to stronger urges to binge eat and then purge.

Bingeing involves eating food — sometimes an extremely large amount — in a short period of time. During bingeing, people feel like they have no control over their eating and that they can't stop. After eating, due to guilt, shame or an intense fear of weight gain, purging is done to get rid of calories. Purging can include vomiting, exercising too much, not eating for a period of time, or using other methods, such as taking laxatives. Some people change medicine doses, such as changing insulin amounts, to try to lose weight.

Bulimia also involves being preoccupied with weight and body shape, with severe and harsh self-judgment of personal appearance.
Binge-eating disorder

Binge-eating disorder involves eating food in a short amount of time. When bingeing, it feels like there's no control over eating. But binge eating is not followed by purging. During a binge, people may eat food faster or eat more food than planned. Even when not hungry, eating may continue long past feeling uncomfortably full.

After a binge, people often feel a great deal of guilt, disgust or shame. They may fear gaining weight. They may try to severely limit eating for periods of time. This leads to increased urges to binge, setting up an unhealthy cycle. Embarrassment can lead to eating alone to hide bingeing. A new round of bingeing commonly occurs at least once a week.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder

Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder includes extremely limited eating or not eating certain foods. The pattern of eating often doesn't meet minimum daily nutrition needs. This may lead to problems with growth, development and functioning in daily life. But people with this disorder don't have fears about gaining weight or body size. Instead, they may not be interested in eating or may avoid food with a certain color, texture, smell or taste. Or they may worry about what can happen when eating. For example, they may have a fear of choking or vomiting, or they may worry about getting stomach problems.

Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be diagnosed in all ages, but it's more common in younger children. The disorder can result in major weight loss or failure to gain weight in childhood. A lack of proper nutrition can lead to major health problems.
When to see a doctor

An eating disorder can be difficult to manage or overcome by yourself. The earlier you get treatment, the more likely you'll make a full recovery. Sometimes people can have problem eating behaviors that are similar to some symptoms of an eating disorder, but the symptoms don't meet the guidelines for a diagnosis of an eating disorder. But these problem eating behaviors can still seriously affect health and well-being.

If you have problem eating behaviors that cause you distress or affect your life or health, or if you think you have an eating disorder, seek medical help.
Urging a loved one to seek treatment

Many people with eating disorders may not think they need treatment. One of the main features of many eating disorders is not realizing how severe the symptoms are. Also, guilt and shame often prevent people from getting help.

If you're worried about a friend or family member, urge the person to talk to a health care provider. Even if that person isn't ready to admit to having an issue with food, you can start the discussion by expressing concern and a desire to listen.

Red flags that may suggest an eating disorder include:

    Skipping meals or snacks or making excuses for not eating.
    Having a very limited diet that hasn't been prescribed by a trained medical professional.
    Too much focus on food or healthy eating, especially if it means not participating in usual events, such as sports banquets, eating birthday cake or dining out.
    Making own meals rather than eating what the family eats.
    Withdrawing from usual social activities.
    Frequent and ongoing worry or complaints about being unhealthy or overweight and talk of losing weight.
    Frequent checking in the mirror for what are thought to be flaws.
    Repeatedly eating large amounts of foods.
    Using dietary supplements, laxatives or herbal products for weight loss.
    Exercising much more than the average person. This includes not taking rest days or days off for injury or illness or refusing to attend social events or other life events because of wanting to exercise.
    Calluses on the knuckles from reaching fingers into the mouth to cause vomiting.
    Problems with loss of tooth enamel that may be a sign of repeated vomiting.
    Leaving during meals or right after a meal to use the toilet.
    Talk of depression, disgust, shame or guilt about eating habits.
    Eating in secret.

If you're worried that you or your child may have an eating disorder, contact a health care provider to talk about your concerns. If needed, get a referral to a mental health provider with expertise in eating disorders. Or if your insurance permits it, contact an expert directly.
Women’s health topics - straight to your inbox

Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Causes

The exact cause of eating disorders is not known. As with other mental health conditions, there may be different causes, such as:

    Genetics. Some people may have genes that increase their risk of developing eating disorders.
    Biology. Biological factors, such as changes in brain chemicals, may play a role in eating disorders.

Risk factors

Anyone can develop an eating disorder. Eating disorders often start in the teen and young adult years. But they can occur at any age.

Certain factors may increase the risk of developing an eating disorder, including:

    Family history. Eating disorders are more likely to occur in people who have parents or siblings who've had an eating disorder.
    Other mental health issues. Trauma, anxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and other mental health issues can increase the likelihood of an eating disorder.
    Dieting and starvation. Frequent dieting is a risk factor for an eating disorder, especially with weight that is constantly going up and down when getting on and off new diets. There is strong evidence that many of the symptoms of an eating disorder are symptoms of starvation. Starvation affects the brain and can lead to mood changes, rigid thinking, anxiety and reduced appetite. This may cause severely limited eating or problem eating behaviors to continue and make it difficult to return to healthy eating habits.
    A history of weight bullying. People who have been teased or bullied for their weight are more likely to develop problems with eating and eating disorders. This includes people who have been made to feel ashamed of their weight by peers, health care professionals, coaches, teachers or family members.
    Stress. Whether it's heading off to college, moving, landing a new job, or a family or relationship issue, change can bring stress. And stress may increase the risk of an eating disorder.

Complications

Eating disorders cause a wide variety of complications, some of them life-threatening. The more severe or long lasting the eating disorder, the more likely it is that serious complications may occur. These may include:

    Serious health problems.
    Depression and anxiety.
    Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
    Problems with growth and development.
    Social and relationship problems.
    Substance use disorders.
    Work and school issues.
    Death.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent eating disorders, but you can take steps to develop healthy eating habits. If you have a child, you can help your child lower the risk of developing eating disorders.
Adults

To develop healthy eating habits and lifestyle behaviors:

    Choose a healthy diet rich in whole grains, fruits and vegetables. Limit salt, sugar, alcohol, saturated fat and trans fats. Avoid extreme dieting. If you need to lose weight, talk to your health care provider or a dietitian to create a plan that meets your needs.
    Don't use dietary supplements, laxatives or herbal products for weight loss.
    Get enough physical activity. Each week, get at least 150 minutes of aerobic activity, such as brisk walking. Choose activities that you enjoy, so you're more likely to do them.
    Seek help for mental health issues, such as depression, anxiety, or issues with self-esteem and body image.

For more guidelines on food and nutrition, as well as physical activity, go to health.gov.

Talk to a health care provider if you have concerns about your eating behaviors. Getting treatment early can prevent the problem from getting worse.
Children

Here are some ways to help your child develop healthy-eating behaviors:

    Avoid dieting around your child. Family dining habits may influence the relationships children develop with food. Eating meals together gives you an opportunity to teach your child about the pitfalls of dieting. It also allows you to see whether your child is eating enough food and enough variety.
    Talk to your child. There are many websites and other social media sites that promote dangerous ideas, such as viewing anorexia as a lifestyle choice rather than an eating disorder. Some sites encourage teens to start dieting. It's important to correct any wrong ideas like this. Talk to your child about the risks of making unhealthy eating choices.
    Encourage and reinforce a healthy body image in your child, whatever their shape or size. Talk to your child about self-image and offer reassurance that body shapes can vary. Don't criticize your own body in front of your child. Messages of acceptance and respect can help build healthy self-esteem. They also can build resilience ⸺ the ability to recover quickly from difficult events. These skills can help children get through the challenging times of the teen and young adult years.
    Ask your child's health care provider for help. At well-child visits, health care providers may be able to identify early signs of an eating disorder. They can ask children questions about their eating habits. These visits can include checks of height and weight percentiles and body mass index, which can alert you and your child's provider to any big changes.

Reach out to help

If you notice a family member or friend who seems to show signs of an eating disorder, consider talking to that person about your concern for their well-being. You may not be able to prevent an eating disorder from developing, but reaching out with compassion may encourage the person to seek treatment.


mayoclinic.org
Eating disorders - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
8–11 minutes
Diagnosis

Eating disorders are diagnosed based on symptoms and a review of eating habits and behaviors. You may see both your health care provider and a mental health professional for a diagnosis.

To get a diagnosis, you may need:

    A physical exam. Your health care provider will likely examine you to rule out other medical causes for your eating issues. The provider also may order lab tests.
    A mental health evaluation. A mental health professional asks about your thoughts, feelings, and eating habits and behaviors. You also may be asked to answer a series of questions to help with the diagnosis.
    Other studies. Other medical tests may be done to check for any complications related to your eating issues.

Treatment

The best treatment for an eating disorder involves a team approach. The team commonly includes your primary health care provider, a mental health professional and sometimes a registered dietitian. Look for professionals with experience in treating eating disorders.

Treatment depends on your specific type of eating disorder. But in general, it includes:

    Learning about proper nutrition.
    Learning how to develop healthy eating habits.
    Guidance in reaching a healthy weight if you're underweight.
    Behavioral therapy, sometimes called talk therapy.
    Medicine, if needed.

If your life is at risk, you may need to go into a hospital right away.
Behavioral therapy

Certain behavioral therapies can be effective in treating eating disorders. These include:

    Family-based treatment (FBT). FBT is an outpatient treatment for children and teenagers with anorexia. It also is likely effective for bulimia and other problem eating behaviors. The family is involved in making sure that the child or other family member follows healthy-eating patterns and maintains a healthy weight.
    Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT is commonly used in eating disorder treatment, especially for bulimia, binge-eating disorder and some other problem eating behaviors. A type of CBT called enhanced CBT is used most often. You learn how to monitor and improve your eating habits and moods, develop problem-solving skills, and explore healthy ways to cope with stressful situations.

Medicines

Medicine can't cure an eating disorder. No medicines have been shown to help with weight gain or to treat anorexia. For bulimia or binge-eating disorder, certain medicines may help manage urges to binge or purge or help manage an extreme focus on food and diet.
A hospital stay or day program

If you have serious health problems related to your eating disorder, your health care provider may recommend that you stay in the hospital for a time. Some clinics specialize in treating people with eating disorders. Some may offer day programs, rather than a stay in the hospital. Specialized eating disorder programs may offer more intensive treatment over longer periods of time.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

To improve the chances of success in overcoming an eating disorder:

    Find a mental health provider with expertise in eating disorders. Treatment is most effective when delivered by a provider with specialty training in eating disorders. Look for a provider with experience in treatments shown to be effective, such as FBT and CBT.
    Follow your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions and try not to stray from meal plans. Follow your health care provider's instructions on physical activity and exercise.
    Talk to your health care provider about appropriate vitamin and mineral supplements. If you're not eating well, chances are your body isn't getting all the nutrients it needs, such as vitamin D or iron. For healthy people, health care providers commonly recommend getting most vitamins and minerals from food.
    Resist urges to weigh yourself. And don't check yourself in the mirror often. This may simply increase your drive to maintain habits that aren't healthy.
    Don't isolate yourself from others. Caring family members and friends who have your best interests at heart want to see you get healthy.

Alternative medicine

Alternative medicine is a popular name for health care practices that traditionally are not part of well-researched standard medicine. Complementary and integrative medicine, when based on solid research, may sometimes be used along with standard medicine — but they are not substitutes for standard medical care.

Most often when people turn to alternative or complementary medicine, it's to improve their health. But dietary supplements and herbal products designed to dampen the appetite or aid in weight loss may be unsafe and misused by people with eating disorders. Such products can have dangerous interactions with other medicines.

Weight-loss and other dietary supplements don't need approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to go on the market. The FDA maintains an online list of tainted weight-loss products, some of which can cause serious harm, such as irregular heartbeats, increased blood pressure, stroke and even death.

Talk with your health care provider before trying any alternative or complementary medicine. Natural doesn't always mean safe. Your provider can help you understand possible risks and benefits before you try a treatment.
Reduce stress and anxiety

Some complementary treatments and approaches may help reduce stress and anxiety. They can promote relaxation and increase a sense of well-being. Examples include:

    Acupuncture.
    Massage.
    Yoga.
    Meditation.

Coping and support

It's difficult to manage an eating disorder when you get mixed messages from the media, culture, and sometimes family or friends. Whether you or your loved one has an eating disorder, ask your health care provider or a mental health professional for advice on coping and emotional support.

Learning effective coping strategies and getting the support you need from family and friends are vital to successful treatment.
Preparing for your appointment

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment. You may want to ask a relative or friend to go with you for support and to aid your memory. A family member may be able to give your provider a more complete picture of your home life.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you're experiencing, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for your appointment. Try to remember when your symptoms began.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    All medicines, including over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, herbal products or other supplements that you're taking, and their doses.
    Questions to ask your health care provider or mental health provider so that you'll remember to cover everything you want to.

Some questions you might ask include:

    Do you think I have an eating disorder?
    What kinds of tests do I need? Do these tests require any special preparation?
    Is this condition temporary or long lasting?
    What treatments are available, and which do you recommend?
    How will treatment affect my weight?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you suggest?

Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your health care provider or mental health provider is likely to ask you several questions, such as:

    Tell me about your eating habits.
    How long have you been worried about your weight?
    Do you exercise? How often do you exercise and for how long?
    Have you found any other ways to lose weight?
    Are you having any physical symptoms?
    Have you ever vomited because you were uncomfortably full?
    Have others expressed concern about your weight?
    Do you think about food often?
    Do you ever eat in secret?
    Have any of your family members ever had symptoms of or been diagnosed with an eating disorder?

Your provider may ask other questions based on your answers, symptoms and needs. Be ready to answer questions so you have time to discuss whatever is most important to you.

mayoclinic.org
Binge-eating disorder - Symptoms and causes
Print
8–10 minutes
Overview

Binge-eating disorder is a serious condition. It always involves feeling like you're not able to stop eating. It also often involves eating much larger than usual amounts of food.

Almost everyone overeats on occasion, such as having seconds or thirds of a holiday meal. But regularly feeling that eating is out of control and eating an unusually large amount of food may be symptoms of binge-eating disorder.

People who have binge-eating disorder often feel embarrassed or ashamed about eating binges. People with the disorder often go through periods of trying to restrict or severely cut back on their eating as a result. But this instead may increase urges to eat and lead to a cycle of ongoing binge eating. Treatment for binge-eating disorder can help people feel more in control and balanced with their eating.
Symptoms

If you have binge-eating disorder, you may be overweight or obese, or you may be at a healthy weight. Most people with binge-eating disorder feel upset about their body size or shape no matter what the number on the scale is.

Symptoms of binge-eating disorder vary but can include:

    Feeling that you don't have control over your eating behavior, for example, you can't stop once you start.
    Often eating much larger than usual amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as over a two-hour period.
    Eating even when you're full or not hungry.
    Eating very fast during eating binges.
    Eating until you're uncomfortably full.
    Often eating alone or in secret.
    Feeling depressed, disgusted, ashamed, guilty or upset about your eating.

A person with bulimia nervosa, another eating disorder, may binge and then vomit, use laxatives or exercise excessively to get rid of extra calories. This is not the case with binge-eating disorder. If you have binge-eating disorder, you may try to diet or eat less food at mealtimes to compensate. But restricting your diet may simply lead to more binge eating.

How much eating binges affect your mood and ability to function in daily life gives an idea of how serious the condition is for you. Binge-eating disorder can vary over time. The condition may be short-lived, may go away and come back, or may continue for years if left untreated.
When to see a doctor

If you have any symptoms of binge-eating disorder, get medical help as soon as possible. Talk with your healthcare professional or a mental health professional about your symptoms and feelings.

If you're embarrassed by your eating and are worried about talking to your healthcare professional, start by talking with someone you trust about what you're going through. A friend, family member, teacher or faith leader can encourage and support you in taking the first steps to successful treatment of binge-eating disorder.

Talking with a professional with specialty training in eating disorders or reaching out to an organization specializing in eating disorders might be a good place to find support from someone who understands what you're going through.
Helping a loved one who has symptoms

Someone who has binge-eating disorder may become an expert at hiding behavior. This is usually because of feelings of shame and embarrassment about the symptoms. Hiding symptoms can make it hard for others to notice the problem. If you think a loved one may have symptoms of binge-eating disorder, have an open and honest talk about your concerns, but remember to approach the topic with sensitivity. Eating disorders are mental health conditions, and the behaviors are not the fault or choice of the person with this condition.

Give encouragement and support. Offer to help your loved one find a healthcare professional or mental health professional with experience in treating eating disorders. You may help make an appointment. You might even offer to go along.
Women’s health topics - straight to your inbox

Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Causes

The causes of binge-eating disorder are not known. But certain genes, how your body works, long-term dieting and the presence of other mental health conditions increase your risk.
Risk factors

Binge-eating disorder is more common in women than in men. People of any age can have binge-eating disorder, but it often begins in the late teens or early 20s.

Factors that can raise your risk of having binge-eating disorder include:

    Family history. You're much more likely to have an eating disorder if your parents or siblings have — or had — an eating disorder. This may point to genes passed down in your family that increase the risk of having an eating disorder.
    Dieting. Many people with binge-eating disorder have a history of dieting. Dieting or limiting calories throughout the day may trigger an urge to binge eat.
    Mental health conditions. Many people who have binge-eating disorder feel negatively about themselves and their skills and accomplishments. Triggers for bingeing can include stress, poor body self-image and certain foods. Certain situations also can be triggers, for example, being at a party, having downtime or driving in your car.

Complications

Mental health conditions and physical problems can happen from binge eating. Complications from binge-eating disorder may include:

    Not feeling comfortable or able to enjoy your life.
    Problems functioning at work, in your personal life or in social situations.
    Isolating or feeling isolated from others socially.
    Weight gain.
    Medical conditions related to weight gain. These may include joint problems, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), poor nutrition and some sleep-related breathing disorders.

Mental health conditions that are often linked with binge-eating disorder include:

    Depression.
    Anxiety.
    Substance use disorders.
    Suicidal thoughts and behavior.

Prevention

If you have a child with binge-eating behaviors:

    Model body acceptance, regardless of body shape or size. Make it clear that dieting or restricting food is not healthy unless there's a diagnosed food allergy.
    Talk with your child's healthcare professional about any concerns. The healthcare professional may be in a good position to identify early symptoms of an eating disorder and help get expert treatment right away. The professional also can recommend helpful resources you can use to support your child.

Feb. 23, 2024

mayoclinic.org
Binge-eating disorder - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
9–11 minutes
Diagnosis

To diagnose binge-eating disorder, your healthcare professional may recommend a mental health evaluation. This includes talking about your feelings and eating habits with a mental health professional. Look for a mental health professional with expertise in treating eating disorders.

Your healthcare professional also may want you to have other tests to check for health problems that can be caused by binge-eating disorder. These may include high cholesterol, high blood pressure, heart problems, diabetes, GERD, poor nutrition, electrolyte imbalances and some sleep-related breathing disorders. Tests may include:

    A physical exam. With your permission, the exam may include getting your weight.
    Blood and urine tests.
    A visit with a sleep disorder specialist.

Treatment

The goal for treatment of binge-eating disorder is to have healthy, regular eating habits. Because binge eating often involves shame, poor body self-image and other negative emotions, treatment also addresses these and related mental health conditions, such as depression. By getting help for binge eating, you can learn how to feel more in control of your eating.

Treatment of binge-eating disorder may be done by a team of specialists. The team can include doctors and other healthcare professionals, mental health professionals, and dietitians, all with experience in eating disorders.
Talk therapy

Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy, can help you learn how to exchange unhealthy habits for healthy ones and reduce binge eating. Talk therapy may be in individual or group sessions. Examples of types of talk therapy that can help binge-eating disorder include:

    Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT may help you cope better with issues that can trigger binge eating, such as negative feelings about your body or a depressed mood. CBT also may give you a better sense of control over your behavior and help you gain healthy-eating patterns. A form of CBT called enhanced CBT (CBT-E) is specifically designed to treat eating disorders.
    Integrative cognitive-affective therapy (ICAT). This type of talk therapy may be helpful for adults with binge-eating disorder. This therapy can help you change the emotions and behaviors that trigger binge eating.
    Dialectical behavior therapy. This type of talk therapy can help you learn behavioral skills to help you deal with stress, manage your emotions and improve your relationships with others. These skills can lessen the desire to binge eat.

Medications

Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (Vyvanse) is a medicine for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This is the first medicine approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat moderate to severe binge-eating disorder, but only in adults. Because it's a stimulant, this medicine can be habit-forming and misused. Common side effects include dry mouth and problems sleeping, but more-serious side effects can happen.

Examples of other types of medicine that may help reduce symptoms of binge-eating disorder include certain medicines used to control seizures and certain antidepressants.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Along with getting professional help, you can take these self-care steps as part of your treatment plan:

    Stay with your treatment. Don't skip therapy sessions. If you have a meal plan, do your best to stay with it. Don't let setbacks keep you from continuing treatment.
    Stay away from dieting. Trying to diet can trigger more binge eating, leading to a vicious cycle that's hard to break.
    Eat regularly. For example, eat every 2 to 3 hours to try to break the restrict-then-binge cycle.
    Plan ahead for triggering situations. Being around certain foods can trigger eating binges for some people. Plan what to do when you're around foods that are tempting.
    Get the right nutrients. Just because you may be eating a lot during binges doesn't mean you're eating the kinds of food that have all the nutrients you need. Ask your healthcare professional if you need to adjust your diet to get essential vitamins and minerals.
    Stay connected. Don't isolate yourself from caring family members and friends who want to see you get healthy. Surround yourself with people who have your best interests at heart.
    Get active. Ask your healthcare professional what kind of physical activity is best for you.

Alternative medicine

Most dietary supplements and herbal products designed to lessen the appetite or aid in weight loss are not effective and may be misused by people with eating disorders. Natural doesn't always mean safe. Some weight-loss supplements or herbs can have serious side effects and dangerously interact with other medicines.

Before you use any dietary supplements or herbs, talk about the possible benefits and risks with your healthcare professional.
Coping and support

Living with an eating disorder can be difficult. Here are some tips to help you cope:

    Treat yourself with care. Living with and treating an eating disorder is very hard. Often other people don't understand what you're going through. Be kind to yourself, even if you're not successful with the treatment plan right away. Try to find communities where people are able to support your efforts.
    Identify situations that may trigger problem eating behavior. Identifying these triggers can help you develop a plan of action to deal with them.
    Look for positive role models. Find role models who don't accidentally add to your body dissatisfaction and pressure to eat in unhealthy ways. Remind yourself that the models, actors and influencers showcased in the media or on social media often don't represent healthy, realistic bodies.
    Look for a trusted relative or friend. Find someone you can talk with about what's going on.
    Find healthy ways to take care of yourself. Do something just for fun or to relax, such as yoga, meditation or a walk.
    Consider writing in a journal about your feelings and behaviors. Journaling can make you more aware of your feelings and actions, and how they're related.
    Visit trusted internet sites. Examples of organizations that offer support for people affected by eating disorders include the National Eating Disorders Association (NEDA). Families Empowered And Supporting Treatment for Eating Disorders (F.E.A.S.T.) offers support to families.

Get support

If you have binge-eating disorder, you and your family may find support groups helpful for encouragement, hope and advice on coping. Support group members can understand what you're going through because they've been there themselves. Ask your healthcare professional or mental health professional about finding a group in your area.
Preparing for your appointment

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment. Think about asking a family member or friend to go with you. Someone who goes with you can help you remember key points and, with your permission, give extra information about your situation.
What you can do

Before your appointment make a list of:

    Symptoms. Include any that may not seem related to the reason for your appointment.
    Key personal information. Include any major stresses or recent life changes.
    All medicines you're taking. Include any herbs, vitamins or other supplements, and the doses.
    A typical day's eating. Make a list of what you eat over a few days to help your healthcare professional or mental health professional understand your eating habits.
    Questions to ask your healthcare professional or mental health professional.

Questions to ask may include:

    What treatments are available, and which do you suggest?
    If medicine is a part of treatment, is a generic drug available?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your healthcare professional or mental health professional is likely to ask you questions, such as:

    What does your typical daily food intake look like?
    Do you eat much larger than usual amounts of food or eat until you're uncomfortably full?
    Do you feel that your eating is out of control?
    Have you tried to lose weight? If so, how?
    Do you think about food often?
    Do you eat even when you're full or not hungry?
    Do you ever eat in secret?
    Do you feel depressed, ashamed or guilty about your eating?
    Do you ever make yourself vomit to get rid of food you've eaten?
    Are you concerned about your weight?
    Are you physically active? What types of physical activity or exercise do you do and how often?

Be ready to answer questions so you have time to discuss what's is most important to you.

Feb. 23, 2024

mayoclinic.org
Bulimia nervosa - Symptoms and causes
Print
9–11 minutes
Overview

Bulimia (boo-LEE-me-uh) nervosa, commonly called bulimia, is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder. People with bulimia binge eat. This means people feel like they've lost control over their eating. They eat large amounts of food in one sitting. This often occurs in secret, and they often feel very guilty and shameful. Then they try to get rid of the food and extra calories in an unhealthy way, such as vomiting or misusing laxatives. This is called purging.

If you have bulimia, you probably focus on your weight and body shape even when you're trying to think about other things. You may judge yourself severely and harshly for what you see as flaws in your appearance and personality. Bulimia is related to how you see yourself — not just about food. It can be hard to overcome, and it can be dangerous.

It's important to remember that an eating disorder is not something you choose. Bulimia is a complex illness that affects how your brain works and how you make decisions. But effective treatment can help you feel better about yourself, eat healthier and reverse serious complications.
Symptoms

Bulimia symptoms may include:

    Living in fear of gaining weight and trying to lose weight in unhealthy ways.
    Repeatedly eating unusually large amounts of food in one sitting.
    Feeling a loss of control during binge eating. You may feel like you can't stop eating or can't control what you eat.
    Vomiting on purpose or exercising to extremes after binge eating so that you don't gain weight.
    Using medicines that make you urinate, called water pills or diuretics, or laxatives or enemas to pass stool when they're not needed.
    Fasting, limiting calories or not eating certain foods between binges.
    Using dietary supplements or herbal products for weight loss. These products can be dangerous.
    Being very unhappy with your body shape and weight.
    Letting your body shape and weight guide how you feel about yourself and your worth.
    Having extreme mood swings.

People with bulimia may use different methods to purge. The severity of bulimia depends on the number of times a week that you purge and the problems caused by doing so.
When to see a doctor

If you have any bulimia symptoms, seek medical help right away. If left untreated, bulimia can severely affect your physical and mental health.

Talk to your primary healthcare professional or a mental health professional about your bulimia symptoms and feelings. If you're not sure if you want to seek treatment, talk to someone about what you're going through. This could be a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or someone else you trust. This person can help you take the first steps to get help.
Helping a loved one with bulimia symptoms

If you think a loved one may have symptoms of bulimia, talk with the person openly and honestly about your concerns. You can't force someone to get help, but you can give encouragement and support. You also can help find a healthcare professional or mental health professional, make an appointment, and even offer to go along to the appointment.

People with bulimia can be at any weight. For example, they could be average weight or overweight. That's why you can't tell just by looking at someone's size whether that person has bulimia.

Signs of bulimia that family and friends may notice include:

    Always worrying about eating or being overweight.
    Having a distorted or negative body image or both.
    Eating unusually large amounts of food over and over again in one sitting.
    Following a strict diet or fasting after binge eating.
    Having acid reflux, a hard time passing stool and other stomach problems.
    Not wanting to eat in public or in front of others.
    Going to the bathroom right after eating or during mealtime, or for long periods.
    Exercising a lot.
    Having sores, scars or calluses on the knuckles or hands.
    Having damaged teeth and gums.
    Changing weight — up and down.
    Swelling in the hands and feet, and cheeks and jaw area.

Women’s health topics - straight to your inbox

Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Causes

The exact cause of bulimia is not known. Genes may play a role in the development of bulimia and other eating disorders. Emotional health and family history may play a role. Also, pressures from society to be thin may play a role.
Risk factors

Females are more likely to have bulimia than males. Bulimia often begins in the late teens or young adulthood.

Factors that raise your risk of bulimia include:

    Family history and genes. Having a family history of eating problems and weight-control issues can increase the risk of an eating disorder. People with first-degree relatives — siblings, parents or children — who are diagnosed with an eating disorder may be more likely to have an eating disorder. This suggests a possible genetic link.
    Mental health and emotional issues. Mental health and emotional problems, such as depression, anxiety or substance misuse, are linked closely with eating disorders. People with bulimia may feel badly about themselves, especially if they're bullied about weight or shape. In some cases, distressing events and factors that cause emotional distress may play a part, such as being mistreated as a child.
    Dieting. People who diet are more likely to have eating disorders. Many people with bulimia severely limit calories between binge-eating sessions. This may cause them to binge eat again and then purge. Other causes for binge eating can include stress, strong emotions, having a distorted or negative body image and boredom.

Complications

Bulimia may cause many serious and even life-threatening complications, including:

    Not seeing yourself as worthy and feeling hopeless or even suicidal.
    Problems getting along with others or being socially isolated.
    Poor nutrition.
    Not drinking enough fluids, which can lead to major medical problems, such as kidney failure.
    Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat or heart failure.
    Severe tooth decay and gum disease.
    Not having a period or not having a period on a regular schedule.
    Gastrointestinal problems, including tears in the tube that carries food, or a hole in your stomach or small intestine. You also could have rectal prolapse, which is when part of the large intestine slips outside the anus.

Conditions that often occur along with bulimia include anxiety, depression, personality disorders or bipolar disorder, and misuse of alcohol or drugs. Self-harm, thoughts about suicide or suicide also can occur.
Prevention

Although there's no sure way to prevent bulimia, you can steer someone toward healthier behavior or professional treatment before it gets worse. Here's how you can help:

    Promote and support a healthy body image in your children, no matter what their size or shape. Help them become more confident in many parts of their personality, not just how they look.
    Have regular, enjoyable family meals.
    Don't talk about weight or shape at home.
    Discourage dieting. This is especially important when it involves unhealthy weight-control behaviors, such as fasting, labeling foods as good or bad, using weight-loss supplements or laxatives, or vomiting.
    Talk with your primary healthcare professional to look for early signs of an eating problem.
    If you notice a loved one or friend who seems to have food issues that could lead to or suggest an eating disorder, think about talking to the person about these issues and ask how you can help. If you do so, be supportive.

Feb. 29, 2024

mayoclinic.org
Bulimia nervosa - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
11–14 minutes
Diagnosis

To diagnose bulimia, your healthcare professional will:

    Talk to you about your eating habits, ways to lose weight and physical symptoms.
    Do a physical exam.
    Request blood and urine tests.
    Request an ECG or other tests to look for problems with your heart.
    Do a mental health evaluation, including talking about how you feel about your body and weight.

Your healthcare professional also may request more tests to pinpoint a diagnosis, rule out medical causes for weight changes and check for any related complications.

A diagnosis of bulimia usually includes episodes of binging and purging at least once a week for three months. But any binge and purge behaviors, even when done less often, can be dangerous and need treatment. The more often the episodes occur, the more severe the bulimia is.
Treatment

When you have bulimia, you may need one or more types of treatment. Treatment includes proven therapies and medicines that may help you get better.

Treatment generally involves a team approach that includes you, your family, your primary healthcare professional, a mental health professional and sometimes a dietitian who knows how to treat eating problems.

Here's a look at bulimia treatment options.
Talk therapy

Talk therapy, also known as psychotherapy, involves talking to a mental health professional about your bulimia and related issues.

Studies show that these types of talk therapy can reduce symptoms of bulimia:

    Enhanced cognitive behavioral therapy, also known as CBT-E, to help teenagers and adults with bulimia create healthy-eating patterns and replace unhealthy, negative beliefs and behaviors with healthy, positive beliefs and behaviors.
    Family-based treatment, also known as FBT, to help the parents of children and teenagers with bulimia learn what to do about unhealthy-eating behaviors and help their child regain control over what is eaten.
    Dialectical behavioral therapy, to help people better tolerate distress, become more emotionally balanced, be more mindful and get along better with others.

Ask your mental health professional which type of therapy will be used and how that therapy helps treat bulimia.
Medicines

Specific antidepressants may reduce the symptoms of bulimia. The only antidepressant that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved specifically to treat bulimia is fluoxetine (Prozac). This is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, also known as an SSRI. It may help with symptoms of bulimia, even if you're not depressed. This medicine works better when it's used with talk therapy.
Nutrition education

Dietitians with special training in treating eating disorders can help. They can design an eating plan to help you eat healthier, manage feelings of being overly hungry or having too many cravings, and provide good nutrition. Eating regularly and not limiting the amounts or types of food you eat is important in overcoming bulimia.
Hospitalization

Usually, bulimia can be treated outside of the hospital. But if symptoms are severe and you have serious health complications, you may need to be treated in a hospital. Some programs for eating disorders may offer day treatment rather than a hospital stay.
Treatment challenges in bulimia

Although most people with bulimia get better, some find that symptoms don't go away entirely. Periods of binge eating and purging may come and go through the years. For example, some people may binge eat and purge when they're under a lot of stress.

If you find yourself back in the binge eating-purge cycle, get help. Follow-up sessions with your primary healthcare professional, dietitian or mental health professional may help you before your eating disorder gets out of control again. Learning positive ways to cope, finding healthy ways to get along with others and managing stress can help keep an eating problem from returning.

If you've had an eating disorder in the past and you notice your symptoms returning, seek help from your medical team right away.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

In addition to professional treatment, use these self-care tips:

    Follow your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions. Also, try to follow what you and your therapist plan for the time between sessions, even if those plans make you uncomfortable.
    Learn about bulimia. Knowing more about your condition can help you stay with your treatment plan.
    Get the right nutrition. If you aren't eating well or you're purging a lot, your body likely isn't getting all the nutrients it needs. Talk to your primary healthcare professional or dietitian about what vitamin and mineral supplements you need. But you should try to get most of your vitamins and minerals from food.
    Stay in touch. Don't stay away from caring family members and friends who want to see you get healthy. Know that they have your best interests at heart. And having people who care about you in your life is healthy for you.
    Be kind to yourself. Try not to weigh yourself or check yourself in the mirror a lot. These actions may fuel your drive to keep unhealthy habits.
    Be cautious with exercise. Talk to your primary healthcare professional about what kind of physical activity is right for you, especially if you exercise a lot to burn off calories after binge eating.

Alternative medicine

People with eating disorders are at risk of misusing dietary supplements and herbal products designed to make them less hungry or help them lose weight. Weight-loss supplements or herbs can have serious side effects and be even more dangerous when taken with other medicines.

The FDA does not need to approve weight-loss and other dietary supplements to go on the market. And "natural" doesn't always mean safe. If you use dietary supplements or herbs, talk to your primary healthcare professional about the risks.
Coping and support

You may find it hard to cope with bulimia when the media, coaches, family, and maybe your own friends or peers are giving you mixed messages. How do you cope with a disease that can be deadly when you're also getting messages that being thin is a sign of success?

Be sure to:

    Remind yourself what a healthy weight is for your body.
    Try not to diet or skip meals, which can cause binge eating.
    Don't skip therapy sessions.
    Don't visit websites that support or praise eating disorders.
    Work with your treatment team to figure out which situations cause thoughts or behaviors that may play a part in your bulimia. Create a plan to deal with those situations.
    Make a plan to cope with the hardships of setbacks.
    Look for positive role models who can make you feel better about yourself.
    Find activities and hobbies that you enjoy to distract you from thoughts of binge eating and purging.
    Feel better about yourself by forgiving yourself, focusing on the positive, and crediting and accepting yourself.

Get support

If you have bulimia, you and your family may find support groups to be a source of encouragement, hope and advice on coping. Group members can understand what you're going through because they've been there. Ask your healthcare professional if a group is in your area.
Coping advice for parents

If you're the parent of a child with bulimia, you may blame yourself for your child's eating disorder. But eating disorders have many causes, and it's known that parents do not cause eating disorders. Parents play a very important role in helping their children recover from these illnesses.

Here are some suggestions:

    Be sure your child gets treatment. Take part in the treatment plan so that you know how you can best support your child.
    Listen. Be an active listener. Give your child a safe space to talk and share feelings without judgment.
    Schedule regular family mealtimes. Eating at routine times is important to reduce binge eating.
    Let your teenager know your concerns. Do not place blame. An eating disorder is not a choice or something your child does. It's a complex illness that affects your child's brain and how your child makes decisions.

Remember that eating disorders affect the whole family. You need to take care of yourself too. If you feel that you aren't coping well with your child's bulimia, professional counseling could help you. Or ask your child's primary healthcare professional about support groups for parents of children with eating disorders.
Preparing for your appointment

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment, and what to expect from your healthcare team. Ask a family member or friend to go with you, if possible, to help you remember key points and give a fuller picture of what's going on.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Your symptoms, even those that don't seem to be related to the appointment.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    All medicines, including those available without a prescription, as well as vitamins, herbal products or other supplements you're taking, and their doses.
    Questions to ask your healthcare professional, so you can make the most of your time together.

Some questions to ask your primary healthcare professional or mental health professional include:

    What kinds of tests do I need? Do I need to prepare for these tests?
    Which treatments do you recommend?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing for me?
    How will treatment affect my weight?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your primary healthcare professional or mental health professional will likely ask you several questions, such as:

    How long have you been worried about your weight?
    Do you think about food often?
    Do you ever eat in secret?
    Have you ever vomited because you were too full?
    Have you ever taken medicines for weight loss?
    Do you exercise? If so, how often?
    Have you found any other ways to lose weight?
    Are you having any physical symptoms?
    Have any of your family members had symptoms of an eating problem or been diagnosed with an eating disorder?

Your primary healthcare professional or mental health professional will ask more questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your appointment time.

Feb. 29, 2024

mayoclinic.org
Anorexia nervosa - Symptoms and causes
Print
10–13 minutes
Overview

Anorexia (an-o-REK-see-uh) nervosa — often simply called anorexia — is an eating disorder characterized by an abnormally low body weight, an intense fear of gaining weight and a distorted perception of weight. People with anorexia place a high value on controlling their weight and shape, using extreme efforts that tend to significantly interfere with their lives.

To prevent weight gain or to continue losing weight, people with anorexia usually severely restrict the amount of food they eat. They may control calorie intake by vomiting after eating or by misusing laxatives, diet aids, diuretics or enemas. They may also try to lose weight by exercising excessively. No matter how much weight is lost, the person continues to fear weight gain.

Anorexia isn't really about food. It's an extremely unhealthy and sometimes life-threatening way to try to cope with emotional problems. When you have anorexia, you often equate thinness with self-worth.

Anorexia, like other eating disorders, can take over your life and can be very difficult to overcome. But with treatment, you can gain a better sense of who you are, return to healthier eating habits and reverse some of anorexia's serious complications.
Symptoms

The physical signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa are related to starvation. Anorexia also includes emotional and behavioral issues involving an unrealistic perception of body weight and an extremely strong fear of gaining weight or becoming fat.

It may be difficult to notice signs and symptoms because what is considered a low body weight is different for each person, and some individuals may not appear extremely thin. Also, people with anorexia often disguise their thinness, eating habits or physical problems.
Physical symptoms

Physical signs and symptoms of anorexia may include:

    Extreme weight loss or not making expected developmental weight gains
    Thin appearance
    Abnormal blood counts
    Fatigue
    Insomnia
    Dizziness or fainting
    Bluish discoloration of the fingers
    Hair that thins, breaks or falls out
    Soft, downy hair covering the body
    Absence of menstruation
    Constipation and abdominal pain
    Dry or yellowish skin
    Intolerance of cold
    Irregular heart rhythms
    Low blood pressure
    Dehydration
    Swelling of arms or legs
    Eroded teeth and calluses on the knuckles from induced vomiting

Some people who have anorexia binge and purge, similar to individuals who have bulimia. But people with anorexia generally struggle with an abnormally low body weight, while individuals with bulimia typically are normal to above normal weight.
Emotional and behavioral symptoms

Behavioral symptoms of anorexia may include attempts to lose weight by:

    Severely restricting food intake through dieting or fasting
    Exercising excessively
    Bingeing and self-induced vomiting to get rid of food, which may include the use of laxatives, enemas, diet aids or herbal products

Emotional and behavioral signs and symptoms may include:

    Preoccupation with food, which sometimes includes cooking elaborate meals for others but not eating them
    Frequently skipping meals or refusing to eat
    Denial of hunger or making excuses for not eating
    Eating only a few certain "safe" foods, usually those low in fat and calories
    Adopting rigid meal or eating rituals, such as spitting food out after chewing
    Not wanting to eat in public
    Lying about how much food has been eaten
    Fear of gaining weight that may include repeated weighing or measuring the body
    Frequent checking in the mirror for perceived flaws
    Complaining about being fat or having parts of the body that are fat
    Covering up in layers of clothing
    Flat mood (lack of emotion)
    Social withdrawal
    Irritability
    Insomnia
    Reduced interest in sex

When to see a doctor

Unfortunately, many people with anorexia don't want treatment, at least initially. Their desire to remain thin overrides concerns about their health. If you have a loved one you're worried about, urge her or him to talk to a doctor.

If you're experiencing any of the problems listed above, or if you think you may have an eating disorder, get help. If you're hiding your anorexia from loved ones, try to find a person you trust to talk to about what's going on.
Women’s health topics - straight to your inbox

Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Causes

The exact cause of anorexia is unknown. As with many diseases, it's probably a combination of biological, psychological and environmental factors.

    Biological. Although it's not yet clear which genes are involved, there may be genetic changes that make some people at higher risk of developing anorexia. Some people may have a genetic tendency toward perfectionism, sensitivity and perseverance — all traits associated with anorexia.
    Psychological. Some people with anorexia may have obsessive-compulsive personality traits that make it easier to stick to strict diets and forgo food despite being hungry. They may have an extreme drive for perfectionism, which causes them to think they're never thin enough. And they may have high levels of anxiety and engage in restrictive eating to reduce it.
    Environmental. Modern Western culture emphasizes thinness. Success and worth are often equated with being thin. Peer pressure may help fuel the desire to be thin, particularly among young girls.

Risk factors

Anorexia is more common in girls and women. However, boys and men have increasingly developed eating disorders, possibly related to growing social pressures.

Anorexia is also more common among teenagers. Still, people of any age can develop this eating disorder, though it's rare in those over 40. Teens may be more at risk because of all the changes their bodies go through during puberty. They may also face increased peer pressure and be more sensitive to criticism or even casual comments about weight or body shape.

Certain factors increase the risk of anorexia, including:

    Genetics. Changes in specific genes may put certain people at higher risk of anorexia. Those with a first-degree relative — a parent, sibling or child — who had the disorder have a much higher risk of anorexia.
    Dieting and starvation. Dieting is a risk factor for developing an eating disorder. There is strong evidence that many of the symptoms of anorexia are actually symptoms of starvation. Starvation affects the brain and influences mood changes, rigidity in thinking, anxiety and reduction in appetite. Starvation and weight loss may change the way the brain works in vulnerable individuals, which may perpetuate restrictive eating behaviors and make it difficult to return to normal eating habits.
    Transitions. Whether it's a new school, home or job; a relationship breakup; or the death or illness of a loved one, change can bring emotional stress and increase the risk of anorexia.

Complications

Anorexia can have numerous complications. At its most severe, it can be fatal. Death may occur suddenly — even when someone is not severely underweight. This may result from abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) or an imbalance of electrolytes — minerals such as sodium, potassium and calcium that maintain the balance of fluids in your body.

Other complications of anorexia include:

    Anemia
    Heart problems, such as mitral valve prolapse, abnormal heart rhythms or heart failure
    Bone loss (osteoporosis), increasing the risk of fractures
    Loss of muscle
    In females, absence of a period
    In males, decreased testosterone
    Gastrointestinal problems, such as constipation, bloating or nausea
    Electrolyte abnormalities, such as low blood potassium, sodium and chloride
    Kidney problems

If a person with anorexia becomes severely malnourished, every organ in the body can be damaged, including the brain, heart and kidneys. This damage may not be fully reversible, even when the anorexia is under control.

In addition to the host of physical complications, people with anorexia also commonly have other mental health disorders as well. They may include:

    Depression, anxiety and other mood disorders
    Personality disorders
    Obsessive-compulsive disorders
    Alcohol and substance misuse
    Self-injury, suicidal thoughts or suicide attempts

Prevention

There's no guaranteed way to prevent anorexia nervosa. Primary care physicians (pediatricians, family physicians and internists) may be in a good position to identify early indicators of anorexia and prevent the development of full-blown illness. For instance, they can ask questions about eating habits and satisfaction with appearance during routine medical appointments.

If you notice that a family member or friend has low self-esteem, severe dieting habits and dissatisfaction with appearance, consider talking to him or her about these issues. Although you may not be able to prevent an eating disorder from developing, you can talk about healthier behavior or treatment options.

Feb. 20, 2018

mayoclinic.org
Anorexia nervosa - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
10–12 minutes
Diagnosis

If your doctor suspects that you have anorexia nervosa, he or she will typically do several tests and exams to help pinpoint a diagnosis, rule out medical causes for the weight loss, and check for any related complications.

These exams and tests generally include:

    Physical exam. This may include measuring your height and weight; checking your vital signs, such as heart rate, blood pressure and temperature; checking your skin and nails for problems; listening to your heart and lungs; and examining your abdomen.
    Lab tests. These may include a complete blood count (CBC) and more-specialized blood tests to check electrolytes and protein as well as functioning of your liver, kidney and thyroid. A urinalysis also may be done.
    Psychological evaluation. A doctor or mental health professional will likely ask about your thoughts, feelings and eating habits. You may also be asked to complete psychological self-assessment questionnaires.
    Other studies. X-rays may be taken to check your bone density, check for stress fractures or broken bones, or check for pneumonia or heart problems. Electrocardiograms may be done to look for heart irregularities.

Your mental health professional also may use the diagnostic criteria for anorexia in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association.
Treatment

Treatment for anorexia is generally done using a team approach, which includes doctors, mental health professionals and dietitians, all with experience in eating disorders. Ongoing therapy and nutrition education are highly important to continued recovery.

Here's a look at what's commonly involved in treating people with anorexia.
Hospitalization and other programs

If your life is in immediate danger, you may need treatment in a hospital emergency room for such issues as a heart rhythm disturbance, dehydration, electrolyte imbalances or a psychiatric emergency. Hospitalization may be required for medical complications, severe psychiatric problems, severe malnutrition or continued refusal to eat.

Some clinics specialize in treating people with eating disorders. They may offer day programs or residential programs rather than full hospitalization. Specialized eating disorder programs may offer more-intensive treatment over longer periods of time.
Medical care

Because of the host of complications anorexia causes, you may need frequent monitoring of vital signs, hydration level and electrolytes, as well as related physical conditions. In severe cases, people with anorexia may initially require feeding through a tube that's placed in their nose and goes to the stomach (nasogastric tube).

Care is usually coordinated by a primary care doctor or a mental health professional, with other professionals involved.
Restoring a healthy weight

The first goal of treatment is getting back to a healthy weight. You can't recover from anorexia without returning to a healthy weight and learning proper nutrition. Those involved in this process may include:

    Your primary care doctor, who can provide medical care and supervise your calorie needs and weight gain
    A psychologist or other mental health professional, who can work with you to develop behavioral strategies to help you return to a healthy weight
    A dietitian, who can offer guidance getting back to regular patterns of eating, including providing specific meal plans and calorie requirements that help you meet your weight goals
    Your family, who will likely be involved in helping you maintain normal eating habits

Psychotherapy

These types of therapy may be beneficial for anorexia:

    Family-based therapy. This is the only evidence-based treatment for teenagers with anorexia. Because the teenager with anorexia is unable to make good choices about eating and health while in the grips of this serious condition, this therapy mobilizes parents to help their child with re-feeding and weight restoration until the child can make good choices about health.
    Individual therapy. For adults, cognitive behavioral therapy — specifically enhanced cognitive behavioral therapy — has been shown to help. The main goal is to normalize eating patterns and behaviors to support weight gain. The second goal is to help change distorted beliefs and thoughts that maintain restrictive eating.

Medications

No medications are approved to treat anorexia because none has been found to work very well. However, antidepressants or other psychiatric medications can help treat other mental health disorders you may also have, such as depression or anxiety.
Treatment challenges in anorexia

One of the biggest challenges in treating anorexia is that people may not want treatment. Barriers to treatment may include:

    Thinking you don't need treatment
    Fearing weight gain
    Not seeing anorexia as an illness but rather a lifestyle choice

People with anorexia can recover. However, they're at increased risk of relapse during periods of high stress or during triggering situations. Ongoing therapy or periodic appointments during times of stress may help you stay healthy.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

When you have anorexia, it can be difficult to take care of yourself properly. In addition to professional treatment, follow these steps:

    Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions and try not to stray from meal plans, even if they make you uncomfortable.
    Talk to your doctor about appropriate vitamin and mineral supplements. If you're not eating well, chances are your body isn't getting all of the nutrients it needs, such as Vitamin D or iron. However, getting most of your vitamins and minerals from food is typically recommended.
    Don't isolate yourself from caring family members and friends who want to see you get healthy. Understand that they have your best interests at heart.
    Resist urges to weigh yourself or check yourself in the mirror frequently. These may do nothing but fuel your drive to maintain unhealthy habits.

Alternative medicine

Dietary supplements and herbal products designed to suppress the appetite or aid in weight loss may be abused by people with anorexia. Weight-loss supplements or herbs can have serious side effects and dangerously interact with other medications. These products do not go through a rigorous review process and may have ingredients that are not posted on the bottle.

Keep in mind that natural doesn't always mean safe. If you use dietary supplements or herbs, discuss the potential risks with your doctor.

Anxiety-reducing approaches that complement anorexia treatment may increase the sense of well-being and promote relaxation. Examples of these approaches include massage, yoga and meditation.
Coping and support

You may find it difficult to cope with anorexia when you're hit with mixed messages by the media, culture, and perhaps your own family or friends. You may even have heard people joke that they wish they could have anorexia for a while so that they could lose weight.

Whether you have anorexia or your loved one has anorexia, ask your doctor or mental health professional for advice on coping strategies and emotional support. Learning effective coping strategies and getting the support you need from family and friends are vital to successful treatment.
Preparing for your appointment

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment and know what to expect from your doctor or mental health professional.

You may want to ask a family member or friend to go with you. Someone who accompanies you may remember something that you missed or forgot. A family member may also be able to give your doctor a fuller picture of your home life.
What you can do

Before your appointment, make a list of:

    Any symptoms you're experiencing, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for the appointment. Try to recall when your symptoms began.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    All medications, vitamins, herbal products, over-the-counter medications and other supplements that you're taking, and their dosages.
    Questions to ask your doctor so that you'll remember to cover everything you wanted to.

Some questions you might want to ask your doctor or mental health professional include:

    What kinds of tests do I need? Do these tests require any special preparation?
    Is this condition temporary or long lasting?
    What treatments are available, and which do you recommend?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor or mental health professional is likely to ask you a number of questions, including:

    How long have you been worried about your weight?
    Do you exercise? How often?
    What ways have you used to lose weight?
    Are you having any physical symptoms?
    Have you ever vomited because you were uncomfortably full?
    Have others expressed concern that you're too thin?
    Do you think about food often?
    Do you ever eat in secret?
    Have any of your family members ever had symptoms of an eating disorder or been diagnosed with an eating disorder?

Be ready to answer these questions to reserve time to go over any points you want to focus on.

Feb. 20, 2018
