
Praise for How Y our Mind Can Heal Y our Body
‘Dr David Hamilton is one of the leading pioneers in the field of the mind–
body connection.  How Your Mind Can Heal Your Body is filled with
enough r esear ch and evidence to pr ove to you how powerful you r eally ar e.
This book will teach you that healing by thought alone is not only possible,
but it is a r eality . I loved r eading it!’
DR JOE DISPENZA , NY TIMES  BESTSELLING AUTHOR OF  YOU ARE THE  PLACEBO
‘As a scientist who has embraced new consciousness, David has made a
bridge that will be helpful to many people who ar e seeking to understand
the connection between our body , our mind and our spiritual self.’
LOUISE  HAY
‘David Hamilton has the unique gift of combining the mind–body
connection and science in a simple but powerful way . Everyone must r ead
his work!’
SUZY  WALKER , PSYCHOLOGIES
‘David Hamilton is an expert on how our thoughts and minds can
physically change our bodies.’
DAILY EXPRESS
‘…very convincing…’
RED MAGAZINE
‘The ease at which Dr David Hamilton is able to explain how visualizations
and the power of the mind can be harnessed to assist the body to heal is
extraor dinary . It is truly a gift, and this updated version of  How Your Mind
Can Heal Your Body is an absolute must-r ead for everyone’ s bookshelves.
As a university lectur er and clinical psychologist, I am constantly r eminded
of the r elationship between mind and body and David’ s resear ch and
evidence pr ovided in this book hits the scientific mark!’
DR PETA STAPLET ON, ASSOCIA TE PROFESSOR,  BOND  UNIVERSITY , AUSTRALIA,
CLINICAL  PSYCHOLOGIST  AND AUTHOR
Also by David R. Hamilton
and published by Hay House
Books
The Five Side Ef fects of Kindness (2017)
I Heart Me (2015)
Is Your Life Mapped Out? (2012)
Choice Point (2012)
The Contagious Power of Thinking (201 1)
Why Kindness Is Good for You (2010)
How Your Mind Can Heal Your Body , 1st edition (2008)
Destiny Vs Free Will (2007)
It’s the Thought That Counts (2006)
Audio Digital Downloads
How Your Mind Can Heal Your Body (2018)
The Five Side Ef fects of Kindness (2017)
I Heart Me (2017)
Quantum Field Healing (2015)
CDs
Quantum Field Healing (2010)
Secrets and Rules for Attracting What You Want:
Live Lecture (2008)
Published in the United Kingdom by:
Hay House UK Ltd, Astley House, 33 Notting Hill Gate, London W11 3JQ
Tel: (44) 020 3675 2450; Fax: (44) 020 3675 2451; www .hayhouse.co.uk
Published in the United States of America by:
Hay House Inc., PO Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA  92018-5100
Tel: (1) 760 431 7695 or (800) 654 5126; Fax: (1) 760 431 6948 or (800) 650 51 15 www .hayhouse.co
m
Published in Australia by:
Hay House Australia Ltd, 18/36 Ralph St, Alexandria NSW  2015
Tel: (61) 2 9669 4299; Fax: (61) 2 9669 4144; www .hayhouse.com.au
Published in India by:
Hay House Publishers India, Muskaan Complex, Plot No.3, B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 1 10 070
Tel: (91) 1 1 4176 1620; Fax: (91) 1 1 4176 1630; www .hayhouse.co.in
Text © David R. Hamilton 2008, 2018
First edition published by Hay House in 2008 (ISBN: 978-1-84850-023-5)
The moral rights of the author have been asserted.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic or
electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval
system, transmitted or otherwise be copied for public or private use, other than for ‘fair use’  as brief
quotations embodied in articles and reviews, without prior written permission of the publisher .
The information given in this book should not be treated as a substitute for professional medical
advice; always consult a medical practitioner . Any use of information in this book is at the reader ’s
discretion and risk. Neither the author nor the publisher can be held responsible for any loss, claim or
damage arising out of the use, or misuse, of the suggestions made, the failure to take medical advice
or for any material on third-party websites.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library .
Tradepaper ISBN: 978-1-78817-149-6
E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019 2779-0
Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-78817-291-2
To Ryan, Jake, Ellie, Lucas and Harriet.
You have br ought huge amounts of joy to the family .
‘Nothing splendid has ever been achieved except by those
who dar ed to believe that something inside of them was
superior to cir cumstances.’
BRUCE  BARTON
Contents
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Part I: The Mind–Body Connection
Chapter 1: The Power of Positive Thinking
Chapter 2: The Power of Believing
Chapter 3: Drugs Work Better If We Believe in Them
Chapter 4: The Power of Plasticity
Chapter 5: The Mind Can Heal the Body
Chapter 6: The Power of Imagination and Observation
Chapter 7: Visualization for Rehabilitation and Sports
Chapter 8: Visualization to Enhance the Immune System
Chapter 9: Visualization for Cancer and Other Conditions
Chapter 10: How Visualization Works
Chapter 1 1: To Stress, or Not to Stress
Chapter 12: How to Visualize
Chapter 13: The Power of Affirmations
Part II: Visualization in Action
Chapter 14: True Stories of Successful Visualizations
In Closing: The Power of Love
A–Z of V isualizations
Refer ences
Index
About the Author
Join the Hay House Family
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s
I’d like to thank my publisher , Hay House, who have supported me for
many years through my develop ment as an author and have always enabled
me to write about the subjects I’ve wanted to.
The first edition  of this book has helped many people in their healing
journey by giving them hope, self-belief and practical tools, and I’m
hopeful the same will be said of this edition too. I sometimes feel that not
enough credit is given to the publishers of books. Without the individual
contributions of all the staff in a publishing house, books like this one
would not reach  the people whom they end up helping. From  the point
where pen first touches paper to the time a book is printed, it’s a team
effort.
Part of this team is my editor , Debra Wolter, who has done a stellar job in
making the text read more smoothly , in clarifying important  points and
making structur al changes, and overall, helping the book become a little
more accessible to the reader .
I’d also like to thank all the people who kindly sent me stories of their
own uses of visualization. These stories were sent in the spirit of kindness,
in the hope that their own expe riences might help others who are sick or
injured.
Between the first edition in 2008 and this new edition, I’ve had
conversations or exchanged emails with a number of researchers who
kindly sent me source information regarding their research or answered
specific question s I had. In particular , I’d like to thank Fabrizio Benedetti,
Barbara Anderson, Lyn Freeman and Stephanie Wai-Shan Louie (first
edition), as well as Ann Jacobse n, Jane Ehrman and Andreas Charalambous
(second edition).
I wrote much of the extra material for this edition in a coffee shop that
I’ve come to refer to as ‘my office’ – Caffè Nero in Stirling, Scotland. I’m
grateful for the very nice coffee, the blueberry muffins, the peppermint tea
(when I’ve reached my caffeine limit… of just one coffee a day), and
especially the friendliness of the staff. Were it not for the latter , I probably
would have found a dif ferent of fice.
I don’t think I’d be a published  author were it not for the support of my
partner , Elizabe th Caproni. When I first started out, Elizabeth and I were
both trying to make headway in our careers – Elizabeth as an actress and
me as a writer . We were finan cially broke, yet in between acting work,
Elizabeth worke d a series of jobs without ever expecting me to do the same.
She tirelessly supported me as I spent time in the warmth of coffee shops
while she sometimes worked outside in the cold rain, so I could write, and
then self-publish, my first book. She’ s been my rock in the years since then.
I’d also not be able to do what I do without the love and support of my
mum and dad, as well as my three sisters, their partners, and my nieces and
nephews. Elizab eth’s parents have also been family to me. I’ve drawn upon
the love from my family so many times to find strength when I needed it
and also to feel at peace. I consider myself very lucky to have such a
network of love and support.
Introduction
There’ s no question that the mind impacts the body . A feeling of
embarrassment flushes the cheeks, a thought of biting on a lemon causes
salivation. There are even physically obvious changes in a male’ s anatomy
when he mentally indulges in a sexual fantasy .
All these things occur because thoughts, feelings, ideas, imagination,
beliefs or expectations in a person’ s mind produce a series of chemical and
biological changes that result in a physical ef fect.
Paying more for a simple painkiller can produce a greater painkilling
effect than a less expensive version, even though they might be the exact
same drug, simply packaged and priced differently . Sometimes, even, an
expensively packaged placebo is as good as a cheaper , mass-market version
of an actual drug.
In the USA, a placebo injection  for pain is more effective than a placebo
tablet, yet in Europe, a placebo tablet is more effective than an injection,
even though they’re both placebos. Some studies on anti-ulcer medication
found that in Western Europe, the placebo was almost as good as the actual
drug is in South America.
The same placebo can produce opposite effects, depending on what a
person believes it’s for. Believi ng an inhaler can relax airways can relax
airways, yet believing it contains allergens can constrict them, even if it’s a
placebo in both cases. Believing  a tablet to be a stimulant can cause muscle
tension and an increase in heart rate and blood pressure, yet believing it to
be a relaxant can relax the muscles and reduce heart rate and blood
pressure. Some people even get drunk on alcohol placebos. And some of the
power of Viagra may be down to the fact that its name sounds like Niagara,
which is a powerful ‘force of nature’.
There are many ways that the mind impacts the body . Feeling stressed
produces stress hormones, increases blood pressure and constricts arteries.
Yet the feelings  associated with love, kindness or compassion produce a
hormone that reduces blood pressure and dilates arteries – an entirely
opposite ef fect.
Placing our attention on the breath, as in meditation, can create  physical
changes in the structure of the brain, almost as if we’ve taken our brain to
the gym. Some studies even find that meditation impacts around 2,000 of
our genes.
Visualizing something also creates physical changes in the brain, in
accordance with what a person is visualizing. In some ways, the brain can’t
tell the difference between what’ s real and what a person imagines . Studies
on sports performers, and even on patients recovering from a stroke, show
that imagining moving their muscles causes significant improvements in
their muscles.
Studies on the immune system even show that visualizing the action of
the immune system can enhance immune function. In some research, cancer
patients under going chemotherapy who visualized the workings of their
immune system  fared much better than patients who did not do the
visualizations. People have applied visualization strategies to all manner of
different ailmen ts, injuries and medical conditions, many of which you’ll
read about in this book.
How This Book Works
The first part of the book shares the scientific evidence for the mind–body
connection, from the impact of attitude on ageing, the immune  system and
the heart, to how the placebo effect works and several examples of it, to the
effects of meditation and how visualization works to bring about changes in
the brain and body; it also shares research on the use of visualization to
assist sportspeople, stroke suf ferers and those under going cancer treatment.
The second half of the book teaches you how to visualize, explains the
key strategies and shares numerous real examples of visualization strategies
successfully used by people around the world. It also includes  an A–Z of
medical conditions, with one or more suggested visualization for each.
Throughout the book, I’ve used the terms ‘visualization’  and ‘imagery’
mostly interchan geably , to refer to the same phenomenon of having a clear
internal mental representation of something. In the book, I share more of
what this means and how to create such a representation.
This is the 10-year anniversary edition of How Your Mind Can Heal Your
Body . When I first wrote the book, in 2008, I had no idea of the number of
people who would read it or use it as a guide to assist them through their
recovery from injury , illness or disease, nor that one day I’d write an
introduction to a 10-year anniversary edition. I’m very pleased to have been
able to help people, even in this small way .
Research has progressed much in these past 10 years. This new edition
contains four new chapters that summarize a great deal of the research on
the use of visualization in a number of scenarios: to enhance sports
performance, whether for the absolute beginner or the elite performer; in
the rehabilitation  of people who have had a stroke; and in how visualization
can impact the immune system and how this has benefited people with
cancer who were under going chemotherapy , radiotherapy and/or sur gery.
The new material also summarizes published scientific studies on the use
of visualization for asthma, total knee replacement, arthritis, interstitial
cystitis, wound healing, and other conditions, as well as explaining how
visualization actually works to bring about changes in the body . The
scientific references for all studies cited can be found in the References
section at the back of the book, should you wish to look into specific areas
yourself in more depth.
This new edition also includes new stories from people who used
visualization to help them recover from cancer , ME/CFS, cardiovascular
disease, post-polio syndrome, lupus, hay fever , underacti ve thyroid,
psoriasis, to reduce inflammation, to remove warts and verrucas, even to
beat travel sickness.
This book is by no means the answer to all questions regarding the
impact of the mind on the body and its use in aiding healing, nor is it the
last word on the subject. It’s more of a simplified practical guide  that shares
the science on how the mind– body connection works in order that this
understanding can help readers have more belief in their own use of their
mind, together with some simpl e instructions on how to use the mind to aid
a healing process.
It’s my wish that this book will offer hope and practical guidance to
people who need it. I also hope that by bringing the broad subje ct of mind–
body research together in the clear and concise way that I’ve presented it,
this book will also lead to more active scientific research.
Let me also say that although the title of the book says ‘… heal the
body’, I am of course not suggesting that the mind is the sole agency in a
person’ s recovery from injury , illness and disease; instead, I’m saying that it
plays a contributory role that sometimes might be significant.
We use our mind all the time to make us feel good or even to make us
feel stressed, without realizing that the direction we point it in can have an
effect. Thinking of people and things that annoy us, for example, might
slow healing by suppressing the immune system, while thinking in such a
way that makes us feel good or relaxed might enhance the immune system.
In this book, I’ve suggested that we use our mind in addition  to whatever
medical advice or interventions  we might be under going, not instead of
them – just as we don’t exercise instead of eating, or meditat e instead of
sleeping. One thing complements the other . It doesn’ t substitute it. Thus, we
should use our mind as support for natural healing processes, as well as
support for drug and other medical interventions.
Perhaps a more appropriate title for the book would be ‘… help the
body’. However , I don’t wish to downplay the powerful role that the mind
can play in healing, because sometimes, how a person uses their mind
might be extremely important.
I hope you enjoy reading the book and that whether you’re a patient, an
interested reader , a therapist, a health professional or an academ ic, you find
something of value within its pages.

Chapter 1
The Power of Positive Thinking
‘A pessimist sees the difficulty in
every opportunity; an optimist sees
the opportunity in every difficulty .’
WINST ON CHURCHILL
Optimists live longer than pessimists! That’ s the conclusion of a 30-year
study involving 447 people that was conducted by scientists at the Mayo
Clinic in the USA. They found that optimists had around a 50 per cent
lower risk of early death than pessimists, and wrote that ‘… mind and body
are linked and attitude has an impact on the final outcome – death.’
A startling statistic! Optimists were also found to have fewer physical
and emotional health problems , less pain and increased energy, and they
generally felt more peaceful, happier and calmer than the pessimists.
A 2004 study published in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry
found a similar thing. It concluded that there is a ‘… protective relationship
between… optim ism and all-cause mortality in old age’. Optim ism protects
you from  illness. The scientists studied the responses given by 999 Dutch
men and women between  the ages of 65 and 85 to a range of statements,
including:
‘I often feel that life is full of promises.’
‘I still have positive expectations concerning my future.’
‘There are many moments of happiness in my life.’
‘Happy laughter often occurs.’
‘I still have many goals to strive for .’
‘Most of the time I’m in good spirits.’
The results were very clear . Those who showed high levels of optimism,
who would perhaps respond affirmatively to the first question, had a 45 per
cent lower risk of death from any cause and a 77 per cent lower risk of
death from heart disease than those who reported high levels of pessimism.
Another study examined the autobiographies of 180 Catholic nuns that
were written when the women first entered a convent. Scientists examined
the autobiographies 60 years later and discovered that the nuns  who wrote
more positively when they first entered the convent lived much  longer than
their colleagues whose writing was more negative.
One of the reasons a positive attitude is so important is becau se it can
boost our immune system and therefore our ability to fight illness. A
person’ s attitude generally influences their emotional experience; that is,
whether they meet life with more positive or negative emotions.
In a 2006 study conducted at Carnegie Mellon University in the USA,
scientists studie d the effects of the common cold and influenza  viruses on
people who had different emotional styles. One hundred and ninety-three
healthy volunte ers were interviewed to determine whether they had a
positive emotional style (typically experience more positive emotions) or a
negative emotio nal style (typically experience more negative  emotions).
Then they were exposed to either of the viruses using nasal drops.
It turned  out that the people who experienced more positive emotions had
much lower rates of upper respiratory infections than those who
experienced more negative emotions.
As we go through our lives, our attitudes affect how we react to viruses,
bacteria and other pathogens. A positive, optimistic outlook on life is
ultimately better  for our overall health and longevity . We also deal with life
situations differently depending on our attitude to them. A positive attitude
helps us to cope with challenges and even to see them as opportunities,
which ultimately benefits our health.
In the USA, a University of Chicago study examined the attitude and
health of 200 telecommunicati ons executives who had been affected by
corporate downsizing. It found that the executives who saw the downsizing
as an opportuni ty for growth were healthier than those who saw it as a
threat. Of those with the positiv e attitude, less than one-third developed an
illness during or shortly after the downsizing. But of those with a negative
attitude, over 90 per cent becam e ill. In other words, looking at the same
event as positive or negative has a hugely dif ferent ef fect upon health.
Some of the best-studied effects of attitude show that it powerfully
affects the heart. One such study, involving 586 people and conducted by
scientists at Johns Hopkins University in the USA, found that a positive
attitude was the best protection against heart disease.
In 2003, scientists at North Carolina’ s Duke University Medical Centre,
on exam ining 866 heart patients, discovered that the patients who routinely
felt more positiv e emotions (e.g. happiness, joy and optimism) had about a
20 per cent greater chance of being alive 11 years later than those who
experienced more negative emotions.
And in a 2007 study , Harvard scientists studied the effects of ‘emotional
vitality’, which was defined as ‘a sense of positive energy, an ability to
regulate emotions and behaviou r, and a feeling of engagement in life’. The
US study involved 6,265 volunteers and it found that those who had high
levels of emotio nal vitality were 19 per cent less likely to devel op coronary
heart disease than those with lower levels. Attitude can be protective, or
destructive, towards health.
‘Hard Marriage, Hard Heart’
The above title is taken from a US scientific review paper that discussed a
2006 study by University of Utah scientists that had found that married
couples’  attitudes profoundly impacted their hearts.
The scientists videotaped 150 married couples discussing marital topics
and categorized them according  to how they related to each other . They
found that the couples that were most supportive of one another had
healthier hearts.  And the couple s that were most hostile towards each other
had more hardening of their arteries. Hard marriage, hard heart! Being
supportive of another person is much better for health than holding anger
and bitterness and constantly criticizing them.
In some  research, hostility is defined as evading a question and as
irritation and direct and indirect challenges to a person asking a question.
Other research defines it as an attitude of cynical beliefs and lack of trust in
other people. Yet others define it as being aggressive and challenging, or
expressing contempt. In one 25-year study that used these types of
definition as a criterion to determine hostility levels, the peopl e who were
most hostile had five times more incidents of coronary heart disease than
those who were least hostile and were more trusting of people, accepting
and gentle.
The connection between attitude  and the heart is so reliable that a 30-year
study published in 2003 in the Journal of the American Medica l Association
concluded that ‘… hostility is one of the most reliable indicators of
coronary heart disease risk’.
Scientists can quite accurately calculate a person’ s risk of heart disease
by examining their diet and lifestyle – the kinds of food they eat, how much
exercise they get, whether they smoke or drink lots of alcohol. People with
an unhealthy diet, who don’t exercise much and who smoke and drink lots
of alcoh ol are usually most at risk. But scientists can just as accurately
calculate the risk based on attitude – whether people have a positive or
negative attitude or how hostile they are towards others. The good news is
that just as you can change your diet and lifestyle, you can change your
attitude. It’ s up to you.
Of cours e, our life circumstances might be so testing that it’s inevitable
we become ‘hardened’  to some extent, but we still have a choice, no matter
what. I’m deeply inspired by the story of Viktor Frankl, a survivor of the
Nazi concentrat ion camp in Auschwitz. In his bestselling book Man’ s
Search for Meaning  he writes,
We who lived in concentration camps can r emember the
men who walked thr ough huts comforting others, giving
away their last slice of br ead. They may have been few
in number , but they offer sufficient pr oof that everything
can be taken fr om a man but one thing: the last of
the human fr eedoms – to choose one’ s attitude in any
given set of cir cumstances, to choose one’ s own way .
Frankl’ s words are a message of hope that no matter what, our attitude is
our choice. If we search deep within ourselves, we can always make the
highest choice, the one from the softest heart, the one that helps other
people to find comfort and happiness; and, in so doing, the one that makes
us healthier .
Satisfaction
A study  of 22,461 people by scientists from the University of Kuopio in
Finland found that those who were most satisfied with their lives lived
longer . They defined life satisfaction as ‘an interest in life, happiness and a
general ease of living’. Reporting in the American Journal of Epidemiolo gy
in 2000, the researchers found that the men (but not the women) in the
study who were most dissatisfied with life were more than three times as
likely to die of disease than those who were most satisfied.
It’s not so much what happens to us in life that determines our health and
happiness. It’s how we respond  to what  happen s that matters most. If you
live in a nice house but you see someone with a nicer house, do you feel
dissatisfied that your house is not good enough or do you give more thought
to what you love about your own home and the people who share it with
you?
It’s said that the grass is always greener , but if you notice your own grass
and don’t pay so much attention  to other grasses, then you’re more likely to
be happi er and in better health. It’s what you focus on that matters most. It’s
your attitude that counts.
To Complain or  Not to Complain
How often do you complain? In his inspiring book A Comp laint Free
World, Will Bowen encourages us to take up the challenge of going  21 days
without complaining. That mean s to refrain from complaining, criticizing or
unfairly judging. He encourages  us to wear a wristband and to change it to
the other wrist every time we complain; this draws our attention  to when we
complain.
It’s an eye-open er. Most people initially have to move the wristband
more than 20 times a day. It’s great for making you aware of just how you
behave. But after a short time, people find it quite easy to go four or five
days without making a single complaint. That’ s a huge difference and, as far
as I’m concerned, a great boost to their health.
Complaining about things and criticizing people has become a way of life
for so many of us, and we don’t even notice how often we do it. It’s a habit.
And we rarely complain about the truth of things, only how they seem to us.
The same thing may mean something completely dif ferent to someone else.
For instance, say a delivery you were expecting doesn’ t arrive. You
complain that this has ruined your day, setting back your entire schedule.
You stress yourself, creating untold negative effects on your body . Someone
else with a late delivery might decide that there’ s something else they can
be getting on with and might find the delay turns out to be for the best. Is
the delay actually a good or a bad thing? That’ s up to you. But what you
decide matters for your health.
Complaining even affects the people around us. We rarely notice  this, but
we’re like tuning  forks. When you hit the fork, other things nearby resonate
with it. This is also what happens when we consistently comp lain around
people – we trigger their complaints too. All of a sudden, it seems, they too
are inspired to find fault with life and the world. Complaining becomes an
emotional virus that we carry around with us, infecting the people that we
encounter .
Our thoughts and attitudes inspi re our actions, and our actions create our
world. So, our thoughts and attitudes create our world. What kind of world
do you choose?  This is Will Bowen’ s sentiment in his book.  If we stop
complaining then we can get to work on creating a better world. And we’re
doing something positive for the health of our body at the same time.
Instead of complaining, try to focus on what you’re grateful for.
Gratitude begets gratitude. The more things you focus on that you’re
grateful for, the more things you notice and experience that you can be
grateful for . And it’ s good for your heart.
‘Money Buys Happiness When You Spend It on Others’
This was the title of a press release issued on 20 March 2008 by the
University of British Columbia in Canada. It describes research showing
that people who give money away are happier than those who spend it all
on them selves. The research was conducted by scientists  from the
University of British Columbi a and published in 2008 in the journal
Science . The results showed that people who spent some of their money
‘pro-socially’  – that is, they spent it on gifts for others or on charitable
donations rather than on themselves – were happier .
The research involved 632 peop le who were asked to rate their general
happiness and give a breakdown of their monthly income and spending
(including bills,  gifts for others, gifts for themselves and donations to
charities). The authors reported that ‘Regardless of how much income each
person made, those who spent money on others reported greater happiness,
while those who spent more on themselves did not.’
The happiest people were the ones who gave money away . This lies
contrary to what most people think – that we need to keep all of our money
for ourselves just ‘in case’, and that the more we accumulate, the happier
we’ll be. But it needn’ t be lar ge sums that we give away .
To test this theory, the scientists gave 46 volunteers either $5 or $20 and
asked them to spend it by 5 p.m. that day. Half were asked to spend the
money on themselves and the other half were asked to spend it on others.
The people who spent the mone y on others reported feeling happier at the
end of the day than those who spent it on themselves. The scientists said,
‘These findings suggest that very minor alterations in spending allocations
– as little as $5 – may be enough to produce real gains in happiness on a
given day .’
Why not decide to give someth ing away today , to whomever you wish
and in whatever way you wish?
Many other studies have found that, even though our income and
disposable incom e are higher than they were for our grandpare nts 50 years
ago, we’re not any happier . In fact, some polls have found that people
nowadays are less happy than people were 50 years ago.
The British Columbia research shows that the level of income isn’t as
important as what we do with our income. Earning a small salary but
showing generosity with it might lead to greater happiness than earning
millions and spending it all on yourself. Money is not the issue. You can be
rich and be happy and you can be poor and be happy . Much of happiness
lies in what you do with what you have. It’ s down to you!
Indeed, in one aspect of the research, the scientists measured the levels of
happiness of 16 employees at a Boston company after they’d received
profit-sharing bonuses of between $3,000 and $8,000. The researchers
found that happiness was independent of the size of the bonus, but a
product of what the recipients did with it. The employees who spent more
of it on presents for others and gifts to charity were happier than those who
spent it all on themselves.
Being Positive about Getting Older
Attitude affects how fast we age. In fact, positive people live longer! That’ s
the conc lusion of some research conducted by scientists at Yale University
who studied the responses of 660 people to a series of questions about
attitude, such as ‘As you get older, you’re less useful. Agree or disagree?’
Those who generally disagreed with these types of statement, and therefore
had the most positive attitudes about ageing, lived about seven years longer
than those who agreed and therefore had the most negative attitudes about
ageing.
And just as attitude affects the heart, the Yale scientists even concluded
that attitude was more influential than blood pressure, cholesterol levels,
lack of smoking, a healthy body weight and exercise levels in how long a
person lived.
How we think and feel affects us in so many ways. A 2006 University of
Texas study that examined 2,564 Mexican-Americans over the age of 65
found that positive emotions reduced blood pressure.
In 2004 , scientists from the University of Texas even found that frailty
was linked with attitude. They studied 1,558 older people from the
Mexican-American community and to determine levels of frailty they
measured weight loss, exhausti on, walking speed and grip strength. Over
time, they found  that the peopl e with the most positive attitud e were less
likely to become frail.
And in a similar result to the satisfaction study reported earlie r, a 2006
study into satisf action found that people over the age of 80 lived longer if
they were satisfied with their lives. Publishing in the Journal of
Gerontology , scientists from the University of Jyväskylä in Finland
examined 320 volunteers who filled out a ‘Life Satisfaction’  questionnaire.
They found that those who were  most satisfied had half the risk of death of
those who were least satisfied.
One might argue that people who are healthy tend to have a more
positive attitude  and that would explain this, and similar corre lations, and
while this is generally true, the overall body of research does clearly
indicate that attitude impacts  health and is not just a consequence of it.
Essentially , if you have a positive attitude and keep your mind and body
active, you’re likely to stay healthier for longer , and when you do get sick
you’re likely to recover faster . Your mental and physical abilit ies are also
likely to stay with you longer . That’ s the conclusion of much of the research
currently lookin g at the relationship between attitude and the ageing
process. We don’ t need to age as fast as we think we do.
Many people cling to the idea that the brain and body decline with age
and use it to explain why they forget some things, why they sometimes
can’t think clearly and why they feel stiff when they get up. OK, the brain
and body do change. But how fast they change is something that we have an
impact upon.
Developing a Younger  Brain
A study  by scientists from Posit Science Corporation, a US company
specializing in brain training, showed that age-related menta l decline is
actually reversible. Lack of use is a significant factor in mental and physical
decline. ‘Use it or lose it’ is an applicable term. If you stop using a muscle,
it atrophies and becomes weake r. If you keep using it, it becom es stronger .
And even if you’ve lost muscle through not using it, an exercise regime will
restore some, or a lot, of its function. The same is true with mental
functions. If we use our brain, even when we’re older , it works better .
For the study , the scientists designed a training programme that improved
neuroplasticity , which is the ability of the brain to increase its connections.
As you’ll see later in the book, the brain is not a hardwired lump of matter ,
as was once believed, but something that’s constantly changing in response
to our learning and experiences.
Publishing in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, the
scientists reported that elderly adults gained a substantial improvement in
memory after doing the training. The study involved volunteers between the
ages of 60 and 87 taking part in an eight-to-10-week audito ry memory
programme that involved listeni ng to sounds for one hour a day, five days a
week. At the end of the program me their memories had improved so much
that they were performing like adults aged 40–60 instead of adults aged 60–
87. Their mental abilities had improved by around 20 years!
Harvard University professor Ellen Langer conducted a novel experiment
in 1981.  She took volunteers over the age of 70 to a retreat centre for 10
days and asked them to pretend that it was 1959 for the whole time, to ‘try
to be the person they were 22 years ago’. The environment in the centre was
a recrea tion of 1959. Music from 1959 was played, there were magazines
from 1959, the volunteers wore 1950s clothing and the TV even showed
taped shows from the 1950s. The volunteers also had to converse with each
other as if it were 1959 – discussing topics and current affairs of the time,
and even talking about their children as if it were 22 years earlier .
At the start of the experiment, the scientists took a host of physiological
measurements, including heigh t, finger length, strength, mental cognition
and eyesight. After the 10 days in the centre, they took those measurements
again. Amazingly , they found that the volunteers were physiologically
younger by several years.
By actin g as though they were younger , they became young er on the
inside. They grew taller (changes in their back muscles allowed them to
stand taller), their fingers grew longer , they had improved mental functions
and their eyesight had improved, some by several prescriptions. Some of
the volunteers had become mentally and physiologically younger by several
years. Most of them even scored better in intelligence tests.
This study is an excellent examp le of the fact that how we think and feel,
how we act, how we use our brain and how often we use it really matters.
When we’re young we’re constantly engaged in mental activities and
physical activiti es. As we go through our adult lives we change in what we
think we can, and should, do.
We also use our brains less and less. In the early stage s of our
professional lives we’re highly active, but over time we gradua lly become
less so, both mentally and physi cally . But we don’t need to. We just need to
find other things to do. Many people who have lived healthily way into
their nineties are mentally and physically active right up to their final days.
Recent research in neuroscience  has found that some of the best ways to
exercise our brain as adults include learning a new language or learning to
dance. We don’t need to speak fluently or even to visit the country whose
language we’re learning (although we may be motivated to, once we can
speak a little of it), nor do we need to strut our stuff at a nightclub on a
Saturday night. We only need to use our brain to learn the language or
dance steps. It’ s the learning – that is, something new – that matters.
Research has shown that active ly using our mind can reduce the risk of
Alzheimer ’s disease. The authors of one study , reported in the Journal of
the American Medical Association , wrote that ‘On average, a person
reporting frequent cognitive activity… was 47 per cent less likely to
develop Alzheimer ’s disease than a person with infrequent activity .’
Act Your Shoe Size, Not Your Age
Many adults believe so much that the brain and body have to significantly
decline with age that they enter into a self-reinforcing spiral that alters how
they behave. They start to beha ve like older people instead of remaining
younger at heart. They move their bodies less and become less mentally
active, not necessarily because that’s what happens, but because they
believe that’s how things work . In other words, many people  tend to act
how they think they should, rather than how they feel or want to feel.
In the audio programme Magical Mind, Magical Body , Deepak Chopra,
MD, said, ‘One of the things that is becoming very clear about the ageing
process is that what we consider normal ageing may be a premature
cognitive commitment… We, as a species, get committed to a certain reality
of ageing.’
The comedian Billy Connolly had me in fits of laughter once. He said
that he knew he was getting older when he started to get up from his seat
and caught himself making the sound ‘Ooooohhh’. We someti mes do this
out of habit, or just because others do it. We uncons ciously pick up on their
actions and behave the way we’re ‘supposed’  to.
I noticed  one of my nephews do it once when he was four years old, after
a few of the adults around him had just got up from their seats. I had to give
him the positive reinforcement  that he was really strong (much stronger
than the ‘old people’) because he could spring up from his seat without
making any noise. He never did it again.
In a ‘priming’  experiment – where people are subconsciously primed
with an idea – conducted by scientists from North Carolina State University
and published in 2004 in the journal Psychology and Aging , 153 people
were asked to do memory tests after being primed with certain words. Some
were primed with the words ‘confused’, ‘cranky’, ‘feeble’  and ‘senile’  and
others with the words ‘accomplished’, ‘active’, ‘dign ified’  and
‘distinguished’.
When the participants then did memory tests, older adults primed with
the ‘old’ words fared much worse than the ones primed with the more
positive words. The scientists wrote that ‘… if older people are treated like
they are competent, productive members of society , then they perform that
way too’.
It’s not just our own attitudes and how we treat ourselves that are
important, but how we treat other people. If you treat someone like an old,
infirm person, as well as probab ly annoying them when you speak to them
as if they’re a child, it can gradually erode their spirit and cause them to
start believing that how you treat them is how they should be.
It’s my opinion that if people believe they should still be fit and active in
their nineties and if, when we’re younger , we treat older peopl e as holders
of wisdom, life experience and stories, then there will be many more people
in society who are mentally and physically active in their eighties and
nineties than we currently see. It’ s really up to us.
Attitude is everything, they say. I think there’ s a lot of truth in the
statement. If we learn to see the positive side of things then we might just
live longer, healthier , happier lives. A good way to do this is to stop
complaining, be more grateful, and be kind.
In the next chapter we’ll see how what we believe can be so powerful, it
can af fect our ability to heal.
Chapter 2
The Power of Believing
‘The outer conditions of a person’ s life will
always be found to r eflect their inner beliefs.’
JAMES  ALLEN
Imagine if scientists discover ed a new drug that could improve the
symptoms of (and in some cases, heal) the majority of known medical
conditions – just one pill! It would make headline news all around the world
and become the greatest-selling drug of all time. Yet such a thing already
exists. Let me introduce you to the placebo!
A placebo is a dummy drug – a sugar pill – that’s made to look just like a
real drug. It’s used in medical trials so that the drug can be tested against a
control. Being a control, it’s not supposed to do anything – but it does, and
it’s because patients believe it’s a real drug. It’s their belief that’s doing the
work!
The placebo effect has evolved fr om being thought
of as a nuisance in clinical pharmacological
resear ch to a biological phenomenon worthy of
scientific investigation in its own right.
These are the words of Fabrizio Benedetti, a neuroscience professor at
Italy’ s University of Turin School of Medicine who is a world authority on
the placebo effect and is reported to have the most advanced placebo study
lab in the world.
Since the advent of brain-imaging technology , there’ s been a surge of
interest in the placebo effect. Research now shows that for some conditions
that have been well studied, like pain and Parkinson’ s disease, for example,
when a person believes that they’re taking a drug, but it’s really a placebo,
their brain lights up as if they really were taking the drug and produces
what it needs to produce to give them what they expect to happen.
In other words, if they expect a relief of pain, their brain produces its
own painkillers; or if they expect to move better , as in the case of
Parkinson’ s patients, their brain produces dopamine.
The symptoms of Parkinson’ s disease arise from an impaired production
of dopamine in part of the brain, which affects movement. Research has
now shown that Parkinson’ s patients given a placebo but told that it’s an
anti-Parkinson’ s drug are able to move better . Brain scans show brain
activation in the area that controls movement, and dopamine is actually
produced in the region normally deficient. The improved movement is not
just a ‘psychological’  thing. It’ s a physical release of dopamine in the brain.
Chemicals in the Brain
The production of chemicals in the brain when a person takes a placebo was
first shown in 1978, when scientists at the University of California at San
Francisco showed that placebo analgesia (when a person gets pain relief
from a placebo ) occurs because the brain produces its own natural
analgesics (painkillers). It was found that these were opiates, like morphine,
but they were the body’ s own natural versions of morphine, which are
referred to as endogenous opiates. More modern research is beginning to
show that the same kind of thing happens when placebos are given for
many other conditions – the brain produces a natural ‘drug’  that delivers
what the person expects to happen.
There are thous ands of natural substances in the brain and body . In the
words of Dawson Church, author of The Genie in Y our Genes ,
Each of us holds the keys to a pharmacy containing
a dazzling array of healing compounds: our own
brain… Our brains ar e themselves generating drugs
similar to those that the doctor is pr escribing for us.
In a 2005 scientific paper published in the Journal of Neur oscience ,
Fabrizio Bened etti wrote that ‘… placebo effects seen with different
treatments are more likely to track closely with the active treatment to
which they are experimentally paired’.
In other words, if a person is given a drug to treat a condition and then
it’s secretly swapped for a placebo, the chemicals produced are believed to
be natural versions of the drug that was originally used. If it’s a painkilling
drug, the brain produces natural painkillers. If it’s an anti-Parkinson’ s drug,
the brain produces natural anti-Parkinson’ s drugs: that is, dopamine.
Similarly , studies on depression suggest that the brain produces natural
antidepressants. For instance, brain scans have now shown that taking a
placebo in place of the antidep ressant fluoxetine (Prozac) affects most of
the same brain areas as the actual drug.
This is mind over matter at the molecular level. No longer can the
placebo effect be dismissed as a figment of people’ s imaginatio n – just ‘all
in the mind.’  As a former scien tist in the pharmaceutical industry , I know
that this is how it was generally referred to: ‘It’s all in the mind,’  or ‘It’s just
psychosomatic,’  were common phrases I heard. Now we know that what’ s
going on in the mind actually alters our biochemistry .
When you believe something, chemicals are often produced in your brain
that give you what you believe should happen.
As You Believe
The placebo effect is often quoted at 35 per cent, and we think this means
that it works 35 per cent of the time. But this is a very broad generalization.
It actually varies tremendously depending upon the illness, the nature of the
medical trial, the language used by the person prescribing or dispensing the
medicine, how a clinician dresse s, their age, whether they have grey hair or
wear glasses, and even the perso nality of the doctors giving the medicine –
and of course the desire of the patient to get better and how much they
believe that they will get better .
The placebo effect can vary from as low as 10 per cent to as high as 100
per cent in some cases. The higher figures indicate that the capacity to
affect our own healing is much greater than we’d ordinarily think. In some
placebo studies, that ability has been tapped into more than it has in others.
A lot of placebo research has focused on pain, partly because it’s easy to
study in that we don’t have to wait until someone is in pain to study it, but
can induce it experimentally . In one Canadian study that induce d heat pain
in volun teers, more than 70 per cent of them had relief from their pain after
they took a placebo. And MRI brain scans showed a reduction in activity in
regions of the brain that are pain-responsive.
Placebo effects are common and sometimes high with some heart drugs.
Many scientists believe that this is due to the strong brain–heart link. In
2007 a drug company reporte d results of a trial for a new drug for
congestive heart failure. Tests showed that the drug improved the condition
of 66 per cent of patients, which is very good. But the placebo improved 51
per cent of patients.
In a trial of the cholesterol-lowering drug clofibrate, which was used
extensively in the 1980s and 90s, the five-year survival rate for patients on
the drug was 80 per cent. The placebo was 79.1 per cent.
In a 1997 study of drugs used to treat benign enlar gement of the prostate
gland, more than half of the men on the study had a significant reduction of
their symptoms after receiving placebos.
Placebo effects are also known in the treatment of chronic fatigue. In a
1988 trial of the drug acyclovir as a possible treatment for chronic fatigue
syndrome (CFS), conducted by scientists at the National Institute of Aller gy
and Infectious Diseases in the USA, 46 per cent of people improved on the
drug and 42 per cent on the placebo.
In a 1996 study that trialled the steroid hydrocortisone as a possible
treatment, 50 per cent of people improved on the placebo. One woman in
her thirties with severe CFS who was ‘very significantly impaired’, had ‘no
energy, couldn’ t work and spent most of her time at home’  showed a
remarkable recovery after receiving placebos.
Results like these don’t mean that the disease isn’t real, as some people
believe in the case of CFS, which is also known as myalgic
encephalomyelitis (ME). Similarly , sometimes we assume that a drug
doesn’ t work if it’s little better than a placebo. But this isn’t always entirely
correct. Sometimes, a person’ s belief or expectation of recovery can do such
a good job that it can mask the ef fect of a drug.
Research has even shown that the same substance can act as both a
placebo and a nocebo (the nocebo effect is the opposite of the placebo
effect, where a patient develo ps negative symptoms). In a 1969 paper
published in Psychosomatic Medicine , 40 asthmatics were given an inhaler
containing a placebo (water vapour) but were told that it contained allergens
that would cause bronchoconstriction (constriction of the airways).
Nineteen of them (48 per cent) then suffered considerable const riction of
their airways, with 12 of the group experiencing a full asthma  attack. But
when they were  then given another inhaler and told that it would relieve
their symptoms, it did, even though it also contained water vapour .
One person in the study was told that the inhaler contained pollen. She
then swiftly developed hay fever as well as airway constriction.  In a second
experiment she was told that the inhaler just contained allergens but no
pollen. This time she only developed asthma symptoms. In a third
experiment she was again told the inhaler contained pollen and once again
she developed hay fever as well as asthma.
These kinds of observations teach us something very important about the
mind’ s ability to impact the body . A thought or belief isn’t just ‘all in the
mind’. The mind is more than something we use to interpret the world. A
thought or belief isn’t somethin g nebulous that kind of floats off into the
ether . Mind and emotions impact the physical state of the body . They can
even enhance performance.
Performance-Enhancing Placebos
A 2007 placebo  study described an experiment that simulated an athletics
competition involving non-professional athletes who had regularly been
given morphine in training (for the study). On the day of the competition,
however , the morphine was secretly swapped for a placebo.
Yet when they competed, the athletes’  performance was at the same level
as it would have  been if they’d actually taken morphine. The body naturally
produces its own drugs, although they aren’ t drugs in the anabolic steroids
sense but natural substances that, in this case, might help us to perform at
high levels.
A 2007 study conducted at Harvard University even found that people
who get the same level of exercise receive different benefits from it
depending on whether they believe it’ s good exercise or not.
The study invol ved 84 hotel-room maids whose job actually provided
enough exercise  to exceed the US Surgeon General’ s recommendation for
daily exercise. However , the women didn’ t know this and most didn’ t see
themselves as physically active at all. In fact, when the scientis ts surveyed
them, they learned that 56 of the women didn’ t believe that they got any
exercise at all. So, they split the women into two groups.
With one group , the scientists went through with the women all of the
activities that they did during the day, from lugging heavy equipment
around, vacuum ing and changing bedsheets to general cleaning, and pointed
out that they were getting a lot of exercise, sharing with them how many
calories each activity burned. They told the women that their daily activities
actually exceeded the Surgeon General’ s recommendations. They didn’ t tell
the other group anything.
After a month, the scientists took physical measurements of the women.
The group who now knew that they were getting good exerc ise had lost
weight and there was a decrease in their waist-to-hip ratio, body mass index
and body fat percentage, and a 10 per cent reduction in their blood pressure.
It’s a powerful thing, the mind!
The things that you believe can even affect your academic performance.
A 2006 study published in the journal Science  examined the mathematics
scores of 220 female students who had read one of two different fake
research reports. Half read a fictitious report claiming that scientists had
discovered genes on the Y chromosome (which only men have) that gave
men a 5 per cent advantage over females in mathematics. The other fake
paper claimed that men had a 5 per cent advantage only because  of the way
teachers stereotyped girls and boys at an early age.
When the students were tested, the group who believed that the
difference was just stereotyping  did much better than those who thought
that they had a genetic disadvantage.
The Power  of Positive Consultation
The placebo effect is often seen as a nuisance in medical trials. Therefore,
some companies try to remove it in an attempt to get a more accurate
picture of how well the drug works. But things don’ t always go to plan.
In a typical trial, patients are given either a drug or a placebo. The ones
who improve on placebo are called ‘placebo responders’  and are then
removed from the trial. A new trial then begins that doesn’ t have any known
placebo respond ers. But some studies have shown that if, say, 35 per cent of
people improve on placebo in the first trial, then in the second one, even
though the placebo responders have been removed, a new 35 per cent of
patients still respond to the placebo.
This is a total enigma for many companies who set up the trials. But the
reason for this result in these trials lies in the only factor that hasn’ t changed
between the two studies – the doctors! They still say the same things and
communicate with the same enthusiasm from one study to the next. What
they say, how they say it, their enthusiasm for the treatment and how they
relate to the people receiving it matters a lot.
For exam ple, in a 1954 study , patients with bleeding ulcers were given
water injections but told either that the injections would cure them or that
they were being given experimental injections of undetermined
effectiveness. Of the patients who were told that the injections  would cure
them, 70 per cent showed excellent improvement. But of the group who
were told that it was an experimental injection, only 25 per cent improved.
In anoth er study , Fabrizio Benedetti tested the effects of a hidden placebo
on arm pain. When a placebo was secretly given through a saline drip, the
pain level didn’ t change. But when a placebo injection (of saline) was given
in full view of the patients and they were told, ‘I’m going to give you a
painkiller . Your pain will subside after some minutes. Be calm and
comfortable and report your pain sensation during the next minutes,’  the
pain diminished.
In a 1978 study involving dental injections, patients were given either an
‘oversell’  messa ge about a placebo tablet they received before an injection
in the mouth, where the dentists made the drug sound really great, or an
‘undersell’  mess age where the dentists made out that the drug might or
might not work.  The patients who had the oversell message had much less
pain when they had their injectio n, as well as less anxiety and fear, than the
patients who were given the undersell message.
And in a 1987 British Medical  Journal  paper titled ‘General practice
consultations: is there any point in being positive?’  200 patients  were given
either a positive  consultation or a negative one (for minor ailments). For the
positive consultations, the patien ts were told what was wrong and that they
would be better in a few days. For the negative consultations, the doctors
told them that they weren’ t certain what was wrong.
Two weeks later, 64 per cent of those who had a positive consultation
reported that they were bette r, but only 39 per cent of the negative
consultation patients reported being better . The ‘power of positive
consultation’  was almost twice as good as the power of a negative one.
Knowing how enthusiastic to be in conveying a message can be a
challenge for today’ s doctors. On the one hand, they know that what they
say counts, but on the other hand they have to be responsible in conveying
the truth about what the drugs have been proven to do, including their
limits. But what they say clearl y matters, as does how they say it. Current
research shows that language, mannerisms, empathy , warmth and authority ,
as well as enthusiasm and confidence, have a considerable ef fect.
More research is needed to perm it the doctors more freedom in what they
can and can’t say, as well as in what’ s the most effective way to say
something. But it’s up to you what you believe. A lot of power  lies within
you. And by this I mean that you have the ability to think, feel and believe,
and your thinking, feeling and what you believe can affect your
biochemistry .
The Power  of Optimism
Although some of these results point to the power of a doctor ’s personality ,
the personality of the patient also affects how they receive the message and
therefore how well the placebo works for them.
Between 2005 and 2007, scient ists at the University of Toledo in Ohio,
USA, compared the responses of optimists and pessimists to placebos. Over
a series of experiments, they gave the optimists and pessimists a tablet
(placebo) and told them that it would make them feel unwell. The
pessimists respo nded more and felt more unwell than the optimists. Then
the scientists gave the optimists and pessimists placebo sleep treatment and
told them it would make them sleep better . This time, the optimists
responded more and slept better than the pessimists.
Optimists are more likely to benefit from something that’s going to make
them better , while pessimists are more likely to respond to something that’s
supposed to make them worse.
Conditioning – Boosting the Power  of the Placebo
We can boost the power of the placebo, and one way is through what’ s
called conditioning. In a typical conditioning experiment, scien tists give a
patient a real drug for a couple of days and then secretly swap it for a
placebo on the following day. Of course, the patient doesn’t suspect
anything, so when they receive their ‘medicine’  (placebo) they expect to get
the level of relief they’ve been getting when taking the actual drug. And
they do. They’ve been ‘conditioned’  to believe that each injecti on or tablet
will work, just as Pavlov’ s dogs were conditioned to salivate when they
heard a bell ring.
Studies suggest that the longer conditioning is carried out, the more
powerful the effect; the deeper into the body’ s systems the mind can
penetrate, the more powerful the placebo becomes. In some conditioning
experiments the placebo effect has been boosted to 100 per cent – that is,
everyone is af fected.
In one experiment, scientists gave volunteers a flavoured drink
containing a chemical called ‘cyclosporin A’ that suppressed the immune
system. Each time the volunte ers took the drink, their immu ne systems
weakened. After several days the scientists swapped the drink for one that
didn’ t contain any ‘cyclospori n A’, but the volunteers still developed
weakened immune systems. If, on the first day, the scientists had given the
patients a drink and told them it would weaken their immune system, it
wouldn’ t have had as much of an effect. The placebo effect would have
been less.
Similarly , in an experiment conducted by Fabrizio Benedetti where
volunteers were given a placebo and were told it was a drug that would
reduce pain, it reduced pain levels. But when the scientis ts told the
volunteers that the drug would increase growth hormone levels, it had no
effect. To alter growth hormon e levels, the scientists needed to boost the
power of the placebo.
They conditioned subjects with a substance called sumatriptan,  which is
known to boost growth hormone levels. After a few days of taking
sumatriptan, which resulted in increased growth hormone levels, the
patients secretly  received a placebo instead. Yet their growth hormone
levels still increased. On the first day the placebo had no effect, but, through
conditioning, the mind had associated taking sumatriptan with changed
hormone levels,  even though the subjects weren’ t consciously aware of the
changes.
Swapping Drugs for  Placebos
In 2016, Fabrizio Benedetti of the University of Turin School of Medicine
in Italy showed  that Parkinson’ s disease patients could be given placebos
instead of full doses of the medicine apomorphine.
If a patient was given a placebo right away , without any previous
experience of apomorphine, it didn’ t produce any clinical result. But if a
person had received one or more prior doses of apomorphine, the placebo
worked. And it worked in proportion to the number of prior doses the
person had received.
In other words, it seemed that their brains learned. For example, if the
person had received two prior doses of apomorphine, the placebo worked
better than if they’d received just one dose. But if they’d received three or
four prior doses , then the place bo was even stronger . The strength of the
placebo increased according to the number of prior doses of apomorphine a
patient received.
Clinical improv ements were measured as changes in muscle rigidity at
the wrist and also in the activ ity of single neurons in the brain. When
patients received placebos, muscle rigidity reduced and individual neurons
in the brain increased in activity . Amazingly , if patients had been given four
prior injections of apomorphine before their placebo, the clinical and
neuronal improvements were as good from a placebo as they were from
apomorphine itself.
In another study , patients were given morphine for three days and it was
secretly swappe d for a placebo on the fourth day. The patients received the
same level of pain reduction as they did when they were given morphine.
The implications of this are many , but they include the fact that for some
conditions, a person could be weaned from a drug and have it replaced by a
placebo. The placebo might not replace the drug entirely , but it might
reduce how much of the drug the person needs to take. In so doing, it could
save health services around the world huge amounts of money , which could
be put to good use in improving patient care in other areas.
At the time of writing this chapter , as well as for Parkinson’ s disease and
pain, Placebo Controlled Dose Reduction (PCDR), as it’s known, has been
shown to work in small trials for ADHD, psoriasis, some allergies, and
conditions that require a suppression of the immune system, including lupus
and multiple sclerosis. It’s even being considered for use in avoiding
transplant rejection.
The brain contai ns trillions of neural circuits that are linked to every part
of the body . We condition our neural circuits to fire over and over again, so
when we take a pill or have an injection, even though it’s a placebo, the
same circuits fire as when we took the drug. This is because our
unconscious awareness associates the pill or injection with immune or
hormonal changes, as the two studies described above show .
If we tried to consciously affect our growth hormone levels, dopamine
levels or immune systems we might not have much success (although you’ll
learn how to impact the immune system later in the book). Conditioning
boosts the power of placebos or the power of the mind; it allows us to
change systems in the body that we wouldn’ t ordinarily be able to. It really
shows that we have considerable power to affect ourselves using our mind.
We just need to tap into that power .
Later in the book we’ll learn that we can alter the body’ s systems another
way and thus boost the power of the mind through visualization.
Chapter 3
Drugs Work Better If We Believe in Them
‘Believe none of what you hear
and half of what you see.’
BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN
Some drugs never make it to the marketplace because trials show that
they’re no better than placebos. In some cases, their effectiveness is
genuinely low, but in others, their effectiveness can be high; it just so
happens that the placebo effect is high too. Thus, a drug that might
potentially be quite good can be deemed ineffective. But completely missed
in these examples is the power of the placebo – the power of the mind of
the people who receive the drugs in the trials.
This can often be the case with antidepressant medications. Some of the
world’ s bestselling antidepressant drugs are sometimes thought to be
relatively ineffective because evidence has shown that the placebo effect
accounts for most of the antidepressant ef fect.
In a 2008 meta -analysis (a summary of many studies) of fluoxetine
(Prozac), venlafaxine (Effexor), nefazodone (Serzone) and paroxetine
(Seroxat), for example, covering 35 clinical trials involving 5,133 patients,
the place bo effect was shown to account for 81 per cent of the effect of the
drugs. The only significant difference between the drug and the placebo
existed for severely depressed patients. With such a high placeb o effect it’s
extremely dif ficult to prove that the drugs actually work.
While there’ s much debate on this, a very important fact that’s often
missed is that studies of this type show that belief, or something akin to it,
is having a positive effect on a person’ s mental health. It might be that one
of the ways antidepressant placebos work is that they give people hope. I
suffered a period of depression  a number of years ago and I remember
feeling, at one stage, hopeful about the future. It was this hope that saw me
through some of the more challenging days.
A placebo can do a similar job. A patient feels some relief at the
knowledge that something migh t work and this positive expectation can be
enough to trump some of the depressive feelings, particularly when the
medication is taken every day. In a sense, it’s like being given a positive
expectation of hope every day. A key insight is that hope comes from
within. It’ s something that we have according to what we believe.
We can put our hope or faith in anything or anyone. But the key to
harnessing the power of the mind is to recognize that it’s what we focus
upon that matters: what we think  and believe. We unconsciously place hope
or faith on things all the time – things that have meaning for us. But note,
once again, that it’s the meaning  that we give these things that causes
healing, not the things themselves.
The Meaning Effect
In his excellent book Meaning, Medicine and the ‘Placebo Effect’ , medical
anthropology professor Danie l Moerman calls many placebo effects
‘meaning respon ses’. This is because it’s the meaning that the patient gives
a treatment that brings about many healing effects. In other words, some of
our healing lies in our own perception of a medicine or treatment.
In the book Moerman writes, ‘Meaning responses follow from the
interaction with the context in which healing occurs – with the “power” of
the laser in surgery, or with the red colour of the pill that contains
stimulating medicine. Sometimes, a bandage on a cut finger works better if
it has a picture of Snoopy on it.’
There’ s no physical reason why a cartoon on a plaster should heal a cut
faster on a child – there’ s no drug, and no physical interaction between the
ink on the cartoon and the child’ s skin. But it does heal faster . The cartoon
has meaning for the child and it’s the child’ s thoughts, feelings,
expectations and beliefs that then speed up the healing of the wound.
If a person is treated for an illness with a large machine that shoots out
lightning bolts, and it’s presented as the most advanced healing system ever,
or something to that effect, then it will probably work better than a tablet,
even if the mach ine and the tablet are both essentially placebos. It’s not the
machine or the tablet that heal, but our perception of them. This is why
placebos work better if they smell medicinal, come out of brown bottles,
have a technical-sounding name or even if they’re painful or invasive.
In ‘Placebos and Nocebos: the Cultural Construction of Belief ’ C.G.
Helman writes,
The doctor ’s office, hospital war d, holy shrine or
house of a traditional healer can be compar ed to a
theatr e set complete with scenery , props, costumes and
script. This script, derived fr om the cultur e itself…
tells them how to behave, how to experience the event
and what to expect fr om it. It helps to validate the
healer , and the power of their methods of healing.
It’s been said that much of the power to heal from some conditions lies
within us. In some ways, it does – in our ability to choose how we look at
things and what meaning we give to them.
Feeling the Blues
Our thoughts about the colou r of tablets affect how well they work.
Scientists at the University of Cincinnati in the USA  tested blue and pink
stimulants and sedatives on a class of students; both ‘drugs’  were actually
placebos, although the students were unaware of this.
Blue ‘sedatives’  were found to be 66 per cent effective, but pink ones
were only 26 per cent effective. The colour blue seemed to be two-and-a-
half times better than pink for relaxing people. Generally , this is because
blue is a calmi ng colour for most people. But if blue had a different
meaning in another culture, you’d expect the results to be different, and this
is indeed the case.
Daniel Moerman describes some interesting research in Meaning,
Medicine and the ‘Placebo Effect’ . He quotes two Italian studies that
examined blue placebo sleeping  tablets. They worked well for women but
not for men; in men, the blue placebos actually worked as stimulants.
Moerman explains that blue is the colour of the Virgin Mary’ s cloak, so in
Italy, blue is associated with peace. At least it is for women. But the power
of this symbol is overruled in most men. Blue is the colour of the Italian
football strip and football is a very big deal in Italy , especially for men.
I had the good fortune of being in Italy during the 2006 World Cup that
Italy won and I can testify to this. I was in Lucca, a town in Tuscany , during
some of Italy’ s matches. Every winning game was followed by a
celebration involving a lot of the town, with local men waving their blue
football shirts while driving around on motorcycles, singing and peeping
their horns, and even blue smoke from fireworks could be seen.
Moerman points  out that rather than being a calming colour , blue most
likely ‘means success, powerful  movement, strength and grace on the field,
and, generally , great excitement’. At least for men it does; hence blue
sleeping tablets don’t work as well for Italian men as they do for Italian
women because of what the colour means to them.
Wher e You Live Matters
Our beliefs are influenced by our culture, thus the power of the placebo
effect varies depending on where we live. In a US study of migraine
treatments, placebo injections were around 50 per cent better than placebo
tablets. In Europe, however , the picture is reversed. In a European trial,
placebo tablets for the same condition were almost 10 per cent better than
placebo injections.
Moerman points out that ‘getting a “shot”’  is much more common in the
USA, so people believe in it more; hence a placebo injection is better there.
But in the UK, we ‘pop pills’  and so a placebo tablet works better here, at
least for migraines.
This type of cultural effect is common with other drugs too. A French
drug trial of the anti-ulcer medication Tagamet found it to be 76 per cent
effective while the placebo was 59 per cent effective. But in a Brazilian
trial, the drug was 60 per cent effective and the placebo only 10 per cent. As
you can see, the placebo in France worked almost as well as the actual drug
did in Brazil, which is a clear demonstration of the power of our mind to
affect how well a medicine works or not.
The Power  of Per ception
Tagamet was once the best drug for treating stomach ulcers, at least until
Zantac came along in the 1980s.  A number of trials had shown that Tagamet
was around 70–75 per cent effective. But once Zantac was launched and
was marketed as a superior drug, patients’  (and doctors’) positive opinions
about Tagamet began to wane. After all, no longer was it the ‘best’  drug.
The best drug was clearly Zantac as far as they were concerned.
Incredibly , the next set of Tagamet trials found it was now only 64 per
cent effective. Had human biology evolved in the time between the two sets
of trials? Had Tagamet’ s chemical formula changed, even? No. All that had
changed were patients’  beliefs about  Tagame t. Their perception of it altered,
from it being the best to it now being second best. Interestingly , Zantac then
took over as the main anti-ulcer  drug, showing around the same  75 per cent
effectiveness as Tagamet previously did.
Perception has been shown to affect aspirin too. A 1981 study involving
835 women, which was conducted at the University of Keele in the UK,
found that having a brand name on the tablet made a big difference to how
effective the aspirin was.
The study used two types of aspirin tablets and two types of placebo
tablets. One group of women received an expensive-looking aspirin tablet,
packaged well and labelled with a well-known brand name. A second group
of women had a much less expensive-looking, generic tablet that was
simply labelled as an ‘analgesic’. A third group received a placebo, but it
was packaged and labelled as an expensive aspirin. A fourth group received
a placebo, packaged and labelled as an ‘analgesic’.
It turned  out that the expensive-looking, branded aspirin worked much
better than the less expensive-looking one. The expensive-looking placebo
also worked better than the cheap-looking one, even though they were both
placebos. There wasn’ t even that much difference in effectiveness between
the expensive placebo and the cheap aspirin.
I’ve witnessed this type of thing  happen with paracetamol, too. Branded
tablets (Panadol  in the UK), which are shaped and packaged  differently
from the cheaper mass-market plain tablets sold in supermarkets, seem to
work better for people I know . When I asked their thoughts, it turned out
that it was the name (it sounds more powerful, apparently), the brand, the
price (about 10 times more), the appearance and the packaging of the tablets
that gave them more faith in Panadol.
The mass-market tablets, they said, looked cheap and less powerful, and
because of this perception they were indeed (according to my small
analysis) less ef fective, even though it’ s the same drug.
Pharmaceutical companies often choose names for drugs that enhance
their perceived effect. In a 2006  paper published in Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment , psychia trist Aaron K. Vallance suggested that the name ‘Viagra’
actually enhanced the effect of the drug. It’s similar -sounding to the words
‘vigour ’ and ‘Niagara’, which create a perception of vigorousness and
power . In addition, the Niagara Falls is a ‘force of nature’. There’ s no doubt
that the name makes a difference. If Viagra was called ‘Flopsy ’, I doubt it
would work so well!
Harvard medical professor Herbert Benson, author of the bestseller
Timeless Healing , studied angina drugs that were well known and effective
in the 1940s and 50s. At the time, trials suggested they helped 70–90 per
cent of people who took them. When they were later retested in higher -
quality trials, they were found to be much less ef fective.
From then on, they seemed to stop working as well for people, even
though they’d worked previously . Benson suggested that it was mostly
because the doctors prescribing them didn’ t believe in them as much as they
previously had. Therefore, they were unlikely to be as enthusiastic as they
had been when they initially prescribed them.
In Meaning, Medicine and the ‘Placebo Effect’ , Daniel  Moerman refers
to these results, writing: ‘Scept ics can heal 30 per cent to 40 per cent of
their patients with inert medication while enthusiasts can heal 70 per cent to
90 per cent… with the same drugs’.
There’ s sometimes little difference between two drugs for the same
condition. There’ s a difference in test-tube trials. Drugs are very powerful.
As a trained organic chemist, and having worked in the pharmaceutical
industry , I used to build and study them. I still get excited when studying
the chem istry of how a drug interacts with the body’ s systems . Designing
and developing drugs is a painstaking and highly skilled process that
requires exceptional skill in manipulating the chemical structure of
molecules.
But test tubes don’t have human consciousness. Once you add human
consciousness to the test tube – that is, the test tube is a human being – the
person’ s perception of the drug, the doctor , the entire process, become all-
important. The person might believe that the drug will work or that it won’ t.
But what they believe will often af fect how well the drug works.
I’d like to see this factor taken  more into account in medicin e. Many
doctors do take it into account, but it’s not universally taught in medical
schools as something that doctors should actively use in their treatments. In
many medical schools, more emphasis is put on the ethical considerations
of giving placebos than on their ability to heal. Some family doctors and
doctors in hospital wards used to prescribe placebos when they could see no
medical reason for the person’ s complaints. Personally , I’d like to see
doctors being trained as healers , as they once were many years ago, thus
taking into account how much they impact the patient in how they
communicate, how they care and the empathy they show .
I met a retired pharmacist once who gave a person suffering from
debilitating migraines, who’d been sent to her as a last resort, a bottle of a
‘new , extremely powerful’  drug called ‘obecalp’. It worked for the person
for years, until the pharmacist learned she was no longer permitted to give
placebos. Obecalp is ‘placebo’  written backwards. Once she explained that
the ‘drug’ was no longer on sale, the person’ s migraines returned, only to
cease again when the pharmacist was able to access ‘secret stocks’  of
obecalp.
You Must Take All of Your Placebos
For some illnesses, four tablets work better than two. What’ s fascinating is
that the same is true for placeb os. Research shows that four placebos are
better than two placebos.
In one study , for example, scien tists combined the results of 79 clinical
trials of anti-ulc er drugs and examined the results for all the patients who
received placebos (a total of 3,325 patients). In the trials where patients
took their placeb os four times a day, the ulcer had healed in around 44 per
cent of them after four weeks, yet it had only healed in 36 per cent of
patients who took their placebo s just twice a day. Studies have also shown
that drugs don’t work as well if a patient doesn’ t take the full course that
their doctor prescribes. Again, the same is true for placebos.
In an investigation carried out by the Coronary Drug Project in the USA,
involving the cholesterol-lowering drug clofibrate, 1,103 men received the
drug and 2,789 received the placebo. The mortality rates and survival rates
were recorded five years later. For the men who received the drug, the
survival rate was 80 per cent; for those on the placebo it was 79.1 per cent,
as I mentioned in the previous chapter .
However , the rates depended on whether people stuck to the prescribed
regimen or not. ‘Good adherers’  were described as patients who took most
of their medication (80 per cent of it) and ‘poor adherers’  were those who
did not. In the good adherers group who received the drug, the survival rate
was 85 per cent, compared with only 75 per cent of the ‘poor adherers’.
Clearly , taking the full course of the drug was highly important. But
exactly the same kind of trend  appeared in the patients who’d received
placebos. The survival rate for the good adherers was 85 per cent, yet it was
only 72 per cent for the poor adherers. Clearly , taking the full course of
placebos was also highly important.
It’s not clear from these kinds of studies why there’ s such a difference
between knowin gly taking all of our placebos or not. It may be that a
person’ s belief that they were not taking their medication was causing them
harm, like a nocebo effect. Or it may have been a consequence of the stress
of knowing that they were not taking all of their medication.
Sham Surgery
Studies have shown that, for some conditions, pretend surgery can be just as
good as real sur gery.
In one study , a group of patien ts were given ‘internal mammary artery
ligation’  surgery for angina, where arteries were tied off to divert the blood
supply to the heart. Another group of patients were given ‘sham’ surgery,
where they still had an operation but their arteries weren’ t tied.
After the real surgery, 67 per cent of patients reported substantial
improvement – they had much less pain, required less medication and were
able to exercise for longer without an angina attack. But, amazingly , 83 per
cent of patients who received the sham surgery experienced the same level
of improvement. It was a reasonably small study – 21 patients received real
surgery and 12 received sham surgery – so it’s difficult to draw absolute
conclusions, but given the overwhelming evidence for the effect of sham
surgery, it’s worth noting.
For the majority  of people, the knowledge that they were gettin g surgery
seemed to be just as good as actually getting it. Over 100,000 people
received the surgery before it was eventually abandoned due to having no
proven clinical benefits, yet it benefited a large number of those people;
many , just because they believed in it.
In sham surgery for arthritis of the knee, surgeons merely make an
incision in the knee, but patien ts usually recover most of their movement
and are able to walk pain-free as much as people who get real surgery.
Studies have shown that, for some conditions, regardless of whether a
surgery is real or not, if you believe that it is (and why wouldn ’t you?) and
are optimistic about it, you often receive the same benefit as if you’ve
actually had sur gery.
This could be seen from an analysis carried out at the UK’s Oxford
University that examined 53 clinical trials comparing real surgery against
sham surgery. The surgeries involved lasers, incisions, endoscopies,
balloons and implants. In 51 per cent of the trials (that is, 27 of the trials),
sham sur gery was just as good as actual sur gery.
Of course, this shouldn’ t negat e the importance of surgery for serious
medical conditio ns. There were serious adverse effects reporte d in 34 per
cent of the sham surgery trials (as well as in 42 per cent of the actual
surgery trials). However , the point is that believing we’ve received surgery,
for non-life-thre atening conditions, can often do just as much good as the
surgery itself.
Sometimes, just seeing a scar after an operation can activate the placebo
effect. A child can heal faster if they get some TLC and a plaster . The same
is true, in fact, with many adults. And, as we now know , the ‘placebo effect’
isn’t just a ‘psychological thing’: it’s a real, physiological thing. Beliefs,
expectations, even thoughts and emotions, have real physical consequences
throughout the brain and body .
It’s What You Know
Such is the power of the mind regarding surgery, tablets or an injection, that
medicines are most powerful when you know you’re getting them.
Strangely , why would you not know you were receiving a medicine? But
this is studied in science to examine how much of a role our mind can play
in some healing processes.
If a medicine is hidden, or even if you’re asleep when you get it (so you
don’t know abou t it), it doesn’ t work as well as when you do know you’re
receiving it. One study of Alzheimer ’s patients found that they often don’t
get the full bene fit of drugs for other conditions (e.g. high blood pressure)
because they can’ t remember taking the medicine.
In a 1994 expe riment involving a powerful painkiller for cancer pain
(naproxen) the drug worked much better for patients who were given
information about the experime nt. The patients were either given the drug
and it was secretly swapped for the placebo after one day, or they received
the placebo and it was secretly swapped for the drug. The key to the
experiment was that half of them  were told this might happen and the other
half weren’ t.
The study showed that naproxen worked better than the placebo. But
both naproxen and the placebo worked substantially better for the patients
who knew what was going on. Having information boosted the power of
both the drug and the placebo. And amazingly , in the group who knew
about the experi ment, the placebo worked even better than the drug did in
the patients who didn’ t know about the experiment.
In other  words, as unbelievable  as it sounds, a placebo can work better
than a drug for some conditions if you’re handed the placebo but the drug is
administered secretly .
In research published in Natur e, a placebo injection given in full view of
a patien t was equivalent to 8mg of morphine infused by a machine. Put
another way, a typical adult intravenous dose of morphine for acute pain is
10mg (as recommended by NICE), yet a placebo injection can provide 80
per cent of the ef fect, if it’ s given visibly .
There’ s almost no clinical effect from diazepam (valium) if you don’t
know you’ve received it. It only seems to work if you know you’ve
intentionally taken it.
In Fabrizio Benedetti’ s words, ‘The existence of the placebo effect
suggests that we must broaden  our conception of the limits of… human
capability .’
What If You Know It’ s a Placebo?
The answer to this question seems to be that it doesn’ t matter so much.
Research has shown that some placebos work even when a person knows
what they’re taking is a placebo. These are known as ‘open-label placebo’
(OLP) studies because the medicine is given in a bottle that’s clearly
marked ‘Placebo ’. But even though a person knows that what they’re taking
is a placebo, it still works. At the time of writing (April 2018),  it has been
shown to work for IBS symptoms, chronic low back pain, migraine,
depression, hay fever , ADHD and even fatigue in cancer patients.
While in most examples of the placebo effect we’ve learned about so far,
it’s a person’ s conscious beliefs and expectations that bring about the
beneficial effect, OLPs or open-label placebos seem to work through non-
conscious processes, according to researchers.
For example, the act of pickin g up a bottle of pills, experiencing the
physical sensations of the shape and texture of the bottle, unscrewing the
cap, as well as the physical action of putting a pill on the hand and lifting it
into the mouth and washing it down with water , activate well-worn
pathways in the brain. Thus, even when a person knows it’s a placebo,
something in the physical movements and sensations activates a
subconscious belief that makes it work. It’s the same kind of effect that
makes water taste fresher if it’s dispensed from a glass bottle rather than a
plastic one.
In addition, as symptoms of conditions can fluctuate throughou t the day,
it’s also believed that some people focus on the positive changes and that
this then activates a normal placebo response.
In one example of the OLP studies, led by Ted Kaptchuk and Irving
Kirsch at Harvard University in the USA, 80 IBS patients were randomized
either into the placebo group, where they’d receive an open-label placebo,
or a control group, where they’d receive no treatment but would interact
with the clinicians in the same way as the placebo group.
The placebo group were told that the placebo pills were ‘made of an inert
substance, like sugar pills, that had been shown in clinical studies to
produce significant improvements in IBS symptoms through mind–body
self-healing processes’. They were told that the placebo effect is powerful,
and that just like Pavlov’ s dog, a person’ s body can respond automatically
to a placebo. They were also told that it was very important that they take
their placebos every day, and that a positive attitude was helpful, although
not essential. The bottles of pills were clearly labelled ‘placebo pills’  and
‘take two pills, twice daily’.
The patients took their placebos  faithfully for 21 days and obtained huge
benefit from them. Compared with the control group, they had much lower
severity of IBS symptoms, at time points halfway through the study and
again at the end of the 21 days.
In a randomized controlled trail of 97 patients with chronic low back
pain, led by Cláudio Carvalho of the University Institute of Psychological,
Social and Life Science in Lisbon, Portugal, and also involving Kaptchuk
and Kirsch, it was shown that open-label placebos produced a significant
reduction in pain over a three-week period of taking them. Compared to a
group of patients who received treatment as usual – which for many of them
meant painkilling medication – knowingly taking placebos produced
substantial pain relief.
In a follow-up, patients who had continued with their usual treatment
during the study were then offered the placebos in addition to their usual
treatment. On taking their placebos, their pain rating was significantly
lessened, and they had much reduced disability .
And in an open -label placebo study for fatigue suffered by 74 cancer
survivors, as with the above studies, patients took two placebos  twice a day
for 21 days. Compared with the group who received their usual treatment,
knowingly taking placebos resulted in an average of 29 per cent
improvement in severity of fatigue and a 39 per cent improvement in
fatigue-disrupted quality of life.
After the main study , again, those who’d received treatment  as usual
were then offered open-label placebos and achieved simila r levels of
improvement to the first group in the study .

Human consciousness has the ability to make a poor medicine work much
better , or an inert substance act like a powerful medicine, or sham surgery
work like real surgery. The mind can exert an extraordinary effect upon the
body . In the next chapter we’re going to learn how our brain actually
changes as we think: even more evidence that thoughts can heal.
Chapter 4
The Power of Plasticity
‘To think is to practice brain chemistry .’
DEEPAK CHOPRA
Your brain is changing as you read these words. The phenomenon is called
‘neuroplasticity’.
Everything you see, hear, touch , taste and smell changes your brain, and
every thought causes microsco pic changes in its structure. In a sense,
thoughts leave physical traces in the brain in much the same  way as we
leave footsteps in the sand on a beach.
As you think, millions of brain cells (neurons) reach out and connect with
each other , moulding the actua l substance of the brain just as a potter
moulds her clay. The connecti ons between brain cells are called neural
connections. Think of the brain as like a giant 3D map containin g towns and
cities with networks of roads linking them. New roads are constantly being
added to the map as some towns  connect in more and more ways, and some
old roads are lost as they’re no longer used.
In a similar way, your brain contains maps and these also expand and
contract depend ing on how much you use them. For insta nce, if you used
your right hand for a few hours without using your left, the ‘map’ for your
right hand would expand as several new roads (neural connections) were
forged in it. In this way, as we go through life our brain maps are in a
continual state of expansion and contraction.
Take a well-known study of symphony orchestra musicians, for example.
Publishing in the journal Neur oImage , scientists from the Magnetic
Resonance and Image Analys is Research Centre at the University of
Liverpool showe d that years of being a musician had expanded  an area of
the brain known as ‘Broca’ s area’, which is an area associated with
language and musical abilities. When they compared this area of the brain
with those of people who weren’ t musicians, it was much bigger in the
musicians.
Similarly , studie s of blind peop le who learn Braille show that as they
practise, the brain maps govern ing the tips of their index fingers expand
because they’re using their fingertips more often.
Another way to think of neurop lasticity is to imagine individual neurons
as trees rather than towns and cities. Neurons have branches, just as towns
and cities have roads, and these branches reach out to connect with the
branches of other trees. As activity in a particular brain region increases, the
trees grow new branches. As activity decreases, so unneeded branches
dissolve and fall away .
Your Mind Changes Your Brain
As I’ve pointed  out, it’s not just your physical experiences – which are
processed through your five senses – that change your brain. Your thoughts,
feelings, ideas, beliefs, things you learn, even your hopes and dreams, shape
the brain too.
As an example,  a 2007 scientif ic study of mathematicians, published in
the American Journ al of Neur oradiology , showed  that the area of the brain
that controlled mathematical thinking was biggest for those who’d been
mathematicians longest. With each year spent as a mathe matician –
thinking, abstracting and analysing as a mathematician does – more new
branches were added to the ‘mathematical map’.
In the UK, a study of London taxi drivers found the same kind of thing.
Brain maps had expanded through years of learning and memorizing routes.
Learning is more than just your brain processing what you see, hear, touch,
taste and smell: it involves what  you think about what you see, hear, touch,
taste and smell, as well as the pictures you make in your mind as you think
about, anticipate, reminisce and even memorize things. All of these
processes change your brain.
Studying for exams even changes the brain. Indeed, a 2006 study
published in the Journal of Neur oscience  found brain map changes when
students were studying for their exams. Scientists at the University of
Regensbur g in Germany follow ed 38 medical students while they studied
for their medical exams and discovered that the areas of the brain that
process memory and abstract information grew thicker .
So, our experiences and our thinking change the brain. The brain is not a
static lump of organic matter that delivers genetically programmed
instructions to the body , as many of us have come to believe. It’s a
constantly chan ging network of neurons and connections. And we’re the
cause of the changes.
Norman Doidge, MD, author of The Brain That Changes Itself , writes,
‘The idea that the brain is like a muscle that grows with exercis e is not just
a metaphor .’ Just like muscles, regions of the brain grow thicker as we use
them – as we repeat the same movement, imagine the same thing, ponder
the same thought or idea, feel the same feeling, or even dream the same
dreams over and over again, just as muscles grow as we repeatedly perform
an exercise.
It may come as little surprise to learn, then, that meditation also changes
the brain. Many studies now show that meditation causes neuroplasticity .
As an example , a study of meditators using the Buddhi st ‘Insight’
meditation that was conducted at Massachusetts General Hospital in the
USA  showed that the meditation had increased the thickness of the
prefrontal cortex of the brain – the area that controls concentration.
One of the simplest forms of meditation is mindfulness and one of the
easiest ways to practise it is to simply become mindful of the fact that
you’re breathing. That’ s it. Mindfulness 101. But in placing our attention on
our breathing, we activate the prefrontal cortex of the brain and it under goes
neuroplasticity . In a sense, it grows like a muscle. The prefrontal cortex is
like the brain’ s CEO in that it controls not only concentration but things like
attention, compa ssion, free will and even the ability to control ourselves and
override knee-jerk emotional reactions. This is why mindfulness is
associated with improvements in all of these areas.
Even practising a kindness and compassion-based meditation, like the
Buddhists’  ‘Lov ing-Kindness’  meditation (also known as metta bhavana ),
causes neuroplasticity , this time on the left-hand side of the prefrontal
cortex, a region  associated with positive emotion, and also in the insula, a
region associated with empathy and compassion.
When you use visualization – where you imagine something happening –
one of the things  that occurs is that you change the microscopic structure of
your brain through neuroplasticity . We shall learn how to do visualization
later in the book. We now know that the placebo effect isn’t ‘just
psychological’, but results in real physiological changes, and that
visualization isn’t just a psychological thing either , an inert mish-mash of
mental pictures that are just there to make you feel good. What you do with
your mind has consequences.
If, at first, that sounds like a stretch of the imagination, think  of what
happens when you place your attention on something (or someone) that
makes you feel stressed! Think,  instead, of someone you love. As I showed
in my book The Five Side Effects of Kindness , this brings about physical
changes in the heart, the arteries and even in the immune system.
Use It or  Lose It – a Leopard Can Change Its Spots
Metaphorically speaking!
If you repetitively flexed your right hand over several days, the brain
map for your right hand would expand because lots more neural
connections would have formed in it. But if you stopped doing this and
switched to flexing your left hand, the map for your right hand would
shrink because you were no longer using your right hand and the map for
your left hand would grow instead.
As Norman Doidge has pointed out, the brain is like a muscle. The more
you use a muscle, the thicker it gets. If you stop using it, it atrophies and
gets smaller. Thus, any time you change your way of thinking, many
connections that correspond to your old way dissolve and connections that
correspond to your new way of thinking begin to grow .
So, let’s say you’ve always complained about things. You’ll have built up
brain maps that process your negative thoughts and emotions. But, say, after
reading this book you decide that you’re going to look at things  differently .
You realize that your mind affects your body . You decide to think more
positively and focus on what you’re grateful for instead of what annoys
you. Now you grow new maps that process your new way of thinking.
Complaint-based maps begin to shrink and gratitude maps expand.
In a surprisingly short space of time (studies suggest somewhere between
three weeks and two months), your new positive gratitude map is larger
than the negativ e, complaint-ba sed one. At the neurological level, positive
thinking and gratitude become a habit. These new ways are now wired into
your brain and you really are a dif ferent person.
We need n’t think that we, or our loved ones, can’t change our ways. All
we need to do is make the effort to change our mind. The brain responds to
the mental and emotional changes we make and in time, as it develops new
maps, we don’t need to make as much effort any more. The new behaviour
is wired and has become a habit.
Talking It Through
‘Ther e is no longer any doubt that psychotherapy
can r esult in detectable changes in the brain.’
These are the words of Nobel Prize winner Eric Kandel, and they refer to
the grow ing body of evidence that talk therapies cause neuroplastic change
in the brain (another way of saying that brain maps change). In the presence
of a good therap ist, or friend, talking about our problems actually changes
the brain.
MRI studies of talk therapies have shown that neurons in the prefrontal
cortex light up (are activated) and activity in the area that proce sses painful
emotions reduce s. Talk therapies help us to view a memory from  a new
perspective so that we no longer feel pain when we think abou t something
that previously caused us emotional distress.
In biological terms, energy is diverted to the front of the brain and away
from the area that stores the emotional pain. Millions of new neural
connections are born at the front of the brain and, with less energy to feed
them, those connections associated with the trauma begin to dissolve. Such
is the emotional  intensity of trauma, chronic stress and even depression that
some degree of neural damag e often occurs. But such is the amazing
regenerative capacity of the brain that recent studies have shown we can
even repair the damage.
Childhood traum a is linked with a high number of stress-related  illnesses
in adulthood. It can cause a flood of stress hormones that destroy cells in an
area of the brain that stores memories (the hippocampu s), literally
dissolving it. Some scientists view this as a protective mechan ism. Neural
circuits are literally ‘burned out’ to prevent us from rememberin g, and thus
reliving, the trauma.
But recent studies have shown that neurons in the hippocampu s can be
regenerated. The phenomenon is known as neurogenesis. So, not only can
we literally rewire our brain, but we can also regenerate it. Just 20 years
ago, such an idea was preposterous to science, but now we know it to be
fact. And it’ s much easier to do and more common than you’d think.
Neur ogenesis
In studi es on adult mice living in ‘enriched’  environments – having a
running wheel, the company of other mice, toys, etc. – it was found that the
volume of their hippocampi (plural of hippocampus) increased by 15 per
cent compared with mice who didn’ t live in such environments.
Neurogenesis had occurred. And the same is true for humans.
In 1998, scientists at the Salk Laboratories in La Jolla, Califo rnia, first
discovered stem cells of neurons in the human hippocampus, which was
evidence of neurogenesis. Neurons were in the process of being formed.
We now know that living an active period of life with physica l, mental
and social stimulation can regenerate damage to the brain. Research has
even shown that when we exercise or experience new things, feel excited,
enthusiastic, fascinated, are in awe, experience wonder or even experience
spiritual states, then neurogene sis also naturally occurs. Many of these
states are associated with strong positive emotions.
Studies have shown that neurog enesis continues right through to old age,
to our very last moments. Scientists at the Salk Laboratories injected
terminally ill volunteers with a special chemical that allows newly formed
neurons to be seen under a microscope. They discovered that neurogenesis
occurred in the volunteers’  hippocampi right up to their final days, no
matter how old they were.
Research has expanded into other areas of the brain, and neurogenesis
has been discovered in the area that processes smell (olfactory bulb), in an
area that processes emotion (septum), in an area that processes movement
(striatum) and in the spinal cord. This would suggest that we might have a
much greater potential for regeneration than medical science ever
previously imagined. The human body is a walking miracle that has
amazing power to heal and to regenerate… and it’s influenced by our mind.
To what degree, we’re still learning.
Studies have now shown that learning new things as adults can enlar ge
brain maps and most likely causes neurogenesis. As I pointed out in the first
chapter , learnin g a new langu age is a great way to do this because it
encourages us to use different brain areas. It’s been suggested that if a
vaccine for Alzheimer ’s existed, it would be learning a new language as an
adult.
Learning to play a musical instrument also changes the brain. Even
playing board games, doing crosswords or types of puzzles, or taking a
course at college have a positive effect upon the adult brain, no matter how
old we are.
Learning new dances is also excellent because it involves exercise as
well as the mind. Simply replaying the dances and moves we’ve done for
years, however , isn’t as good because we don’t have to think about new
things. We benefit from the novelty of new experiences. To maximize the
positive ef fects upon our brain, it helps if we’re continually learning.
So, as we go through life, no matter how old we are, if we retain our
curiosity for new things and exercise our body and mind, we can mentally
and physically grow younger .
Chapter 5
The Mind Can Heal the Body
‘Although the world is full of suffering, it
is also full of the over coming of it.’
HELEN  KELLER
As part of the brain-changing process, our thinking produces chemicals in
the brain . Many are known as neurotransmitters. You may have heard of
serotonin and dopamine, which are two well-known neurot ransmitters.
When we think thoughts, neurot ransmitters are released from the branch of
one neuron and make their way to the tip of a branch of another . This
produces a bolt of electricity and is what’ s known as a neuron ‘firing’.
When we repeat a thought several times, additional substances are
stimulated and send signals to the centre of the neuron (the nucleus), where
the signal reaches DNA. It can then activate (switch on) several genes,
which make the substances (proteins) that produce new branches
(connections) between the neurons. In this way, repeating  a thought
produces new connections betw een neurons and is how the brain changes
with our thoughts and experiences.
The process is rapid. Genes are activated within a few minutes and a
single neuron may gain thousands of new branches in a very short time.
One of the significant things to note here is that the genes have been
activated by a state of mind within minutes. This is the mind causing effects
at the genetic level. I emph asize this only to bring attention to the fact that it
actually happens all the time.
When you feel stressed, the feelings of stress generate substances that
lead to the switc hing on and off of hundreds of genes. We just tend not to
think of things in this way, but perhaps if we did make that connection –
that our thoughts and feeling s, ideas, expectations and beliefs have
neurological, physiological and genetic effects – then we would tap into
some kind of placebo effect where the belief is not in a substance or a
clinician, but in ourselves.
Of cours e, when  I talk of genetic effects, I’m not suggesting that we’re
changing the sequence of our genes or even which genes we have, but the
behaviour of them – whether they switch on or of f.
Another type of chemical, know n as a neuropeptide, is also produced in
the brain. There are many different types and they’re associated with
different experiences, states of mind, emotions and attitudes. For example,
oxytocin is a neuropeptide that’s associated with love, connection and
feelings associated with kindness and compassion.
Like other neuropeptides, oxytocin interfaces with neurons by attaching
to parts of the surface of the neurons known as receptors. Receptors are
basically like parking bays of different shapes and sizes. Just as parking
bays in a car park are receptive to vehicles of different shapes and sizes, so
parking bays on neurons are receptive  to neuropeptide s, hormones and other
substances, which is why they’re called ‘receptors’.
If a certa in neuropeptide is produced over and over again in a certain part
of the brain, then neurons in that area develop extra receptors to cope. For
instance, if an endorphin (a neuropeptide) were produced over and over
again, neurons would evolve extra endorphin receptors. If they started out
with, say, 100, then they might evolve to have 1,000. If production of
endorphin reduced, then the neurons would gradually shed these receptors.
In this way , our experiences can change the surface of brain cells.
This is a simplified version of how addiction works. If a person keeps
taking a substance – heroin, say – then neurons would evolve more heroin
receptors. Soon , as the brain develops many more of them, the person
requires more of the drug to get the same ‘hit’.
Many neuropeptides don’t just hang around in the brain. They are
released into the bloodstream and travel throughout the body , where they
carry out important roles. Thus, in a powerful link between the mind and
body , our thoughts and emotions produce neuropeptides and they affect the
body . Many neuropeptides are even produced in the body instead, and can
make their way to the brain.  For instance, some immune cells make
neuropeptides. In this way, the body affects the mind. Mind affects body –
body af fects mind! It’ s a two-way process.
Neuropeptides play an importan t role in the liver, kidneys, pancreas, gut,
colon, reproduct ive organs and skin. Some affect the heart and arteries. In
The Five Side Effects of Kindness , I show  how oxytocin (which is produced
by feelin gs associated with kindness) leads to a dilation of arteries and a
reduction in blood pressure. Neuropeptides also influence blood sugar , heart
rate, respiration, body temperature, the endocrine system, the immune
system, sex drive and even appetite.
How the Mind Affects the Body
In his book Evolve Your Brain , Dr Joe Dispenza discusses the likely
changes in cells throughout the body when a person changes their thinking.
Using the example of a person changing from being impatie nt to being
patient, he describes the probable impact upon cells throughout the body .
Just as neurons evolve how many receptors they have, so cells in our
organs and throughout the body  do the same thing. Initially , in Dispenza’ s
hypothetical example, neurope ptides associated with impati ence would
flood specific cells in the body . The cells would then evolve more receptors
for that neuropeptide.
When the person learned to beco me more patient, the flow of ‘impatience
neuropeptides’  would cease and the flow of ‘patience neuropeptides’  would
take over. The cells would then cut back on the number of impatience
receptors because they would no longer be needed, and would evolve more
patience receptors instead. Thus, as we change our mind, we change our
body at the cellular level.
Think of the flow of neuropeptides as a coloured dye and the
bloodstream as a river. So, as we change our thinking, we chang e the colour
of the dye that we drop into the river. Downstream, rocks are coloured by
our different thoughts. Now , for this analogy , think of the rocks as cells,
although think of them as more like large, spongy boulders rather than
rocks. As we send different-coloured dyes downstream, cells adapt to their
changing environment by evolving more or less of that colour of receptor .
Change the colour of your thoughts and change your body at the cellular
level!
So, when we move from impatience to patience, or from relaxed to calm,
or from one thought to another – from a thought of food to a thought of a
tree, for instance – we alter the connections between neuro ns, produce
chemicals in the brain and af fect cells and systems throughout our body .
Some scientists believe that thoughts only serve to increase or decrease
stress, and that the link between mind and body is only the link between
stress chemicals and cells. I can appreciate how they might arrive at this
conclusion, but I don’t agree. The mind and brain are not so black and
white. Our thoughts aren’ t black and white – stress or no stress, on or off.
There are many shades of colour in between. We can produce an infinite
number of different thoughts, and have infinite varieties of hopes, dreams
and aspirations,  all with their own unique emotional signature, and thus
corresponding blends of proteins and neuropeptides, as well as neurological
and physical ef fects.
The brain and body produce thousands of chemicals and many are
constantly findi ng their way around the body . As we switch from one
mental or emotional state to another , or one expectation or belief to another ,
even if it’s just a subtle change, we change the tone being produced from
the mixture of colours that reflects our thinking. If you’re musically
inclined, you can even think of your mind as producing musical tones
instead. Each state of mind produces a variety of colour (or musical) tones.
A subtle shift of perspective produces a subtle shift in tone and this
produces a subtle change in cells throughout the body . Across the body ,
cells dance to the tune of the mind. So, when we think of healing from an
illness, there’ s more than just a reduction of stress chemicals interfacing
with cells throughout the body . A range of neuropeptides corresponding to
our thoughts, beliefs, expectations, and even our hopes, will make their way
out of the brain and flow around the body , painting it in a variety of colour
tones or playing dif ferent tunes.
The Mind–DNA  Interface
Just as the mind affects gene s in neurons, so it affects genes in cells
throughout the body . I appreciate that this isn’t the kind of everyday
language we’re used to, and it does sound a bit ‘out there’, but I wish to
emphasize the many different consequences of our mental and emotional
states, our expectations and beliefs, our hopes, our dreams and what we
imagine, and the dif ferent ways that some of the ef fects occur .
If it sounds too ‘out there’, bring your attention back to the fact that
feelings of stress impact hundred s of genes. Even consider that when a male
mentally indulg es his imagination in a sexual fantasy , the phys ical change
in blood flow to the penis is a consequence of increased nitric oxide
production, which in turn is produced by activation of an enzyme called
‘nitric oxide synthase’, which is itself made through the activation of a
gene… all from something he’ s imagining.
Simply speakin g, when neuropeptides dock onto their receptors,
messages are delivered into the cells. These reach the DNA  and genes are
either switched on or of f or made a little brighter or dimmer .
DNA  contains around 23,000 genes. Think of the genes as light bulbs (I
think of them as flashing Christmas tree lights because multip le genes are
involved at the same time). When a gene switches on, a protein is produced.
This protein might be somethin g involved in construction, such as in the
construction of new cells for tissues, bone, tendon, blood or for the immune
system; or it might be an enzyme that will help in the changing of
something into something else. For instance, the enzyme pepsin helps to
convert the food we eat into smaller units that the body can use. What is
produced might even be a hormone that will deliver a message to another
cell. So, when genes switch on, they produce all that the body needs.
In terms  of a particular healin g process, genes would switch on and
proteins would be made that would be used in the construction of new cells,
skin, tendon, blood or bone, as well as to initiate (and halt) the
inflammatory process. Genes would also produce proteins that would be
involved in other aspects of the immune response and, if the body had
suffered a cut, different ones would be produced to help blood clot around
the wound. Some genes would produce proteins that would affect other
relevant systems in the body so that the entire organism (your body) would
be tipped in the direction of healing.
As an example, let’s say that a person has a tendency to be hostile. Their
brain will produce the appropri ate neuropeptides (and cease production of
others) and these will flood throughout the body , finding cells in organs and
tissues that they could interface with.
Wound healing is quite sensitiv e to our mental and emotional states. It’s
known that hostility and stress slow it down, for example, and feelings of
warmth and connection can speed it up. Neuropeptides associated with the
mental and emotional state of hostility would interface with cells and
deliver message s to DNA. Then, genes would be activated and proteins
produced.
Some genes that are important to the healing process would  only be
partially activate d (or sometimes not at all) – like the dimmer switch only
being partially turned on. Other  genes would be deactivated, or the dimmer
switch turned down (growth hormones, for instance, that are important in
healing). Thus, hostility might mean that the proteins required for healing
wouldn’ t be produced in as high a quantity as they would be in a calm state
of mind.
Indeed, in keeping with one of the themes of Chapter 1, scientis ts at Ohio
State University in the USA  showed that hostility significantly altered
healing rate. The study , published in 2005 in Archives of General
Psychiatry  and involving 42 married couples, showed that those who were
most hostile healed at only 60 per cent of the rate of those who were least
hostile.
And in another 2005 study it was found that stress reduced the levels of
growth hormones at the sites of wounds. Growth hormones (which are
proteins) are produced when certain genes are switched on; they help
healing. The scientists found that mental and emotional stress reduced the
levels of growth  hormones at wound sites. This is partly why wounds can
take longer to heal when we’re stressed.
Looking at the actual genes involved, the scientists found that over 100
genes were ‘downregulated’  during stress, which means that, in the light
bulb analogy, the brightness of around 100 bulbs was dimmed by stress, and
over 70 were ‘upregulated’, so 70 bulbs became brighter . The scientists
noted that ‘100 downregulated and 70 upregulated genes’  tipped  the genetic
balance towards  the death of cells instead of the birth and growth of cells –
and it’ s birth and growth that are required at wound sites.
If instea d of feeling stress you felt calm, which might be because of your
positive attitude or maybe your trust in the medical team and belief that
everything will work out OK, different genes would be upregulated and
downregulated, which could speed up healing. More growth hormones
would be produced at the site of injury and these would speed up the
healing process. Indeed, in another Ohio State University study , published
in Psychoneur oendocrinology , scientists showed that social support, which
leads to a state of calm (as well as production of oxytocin), speeded up
wound healing.
So, all throughout the body , genes really are responding to our mind. In
The Genie in Your Genes , Dawso n Church writes, ‘Now we’re starting to
understand that our consciousness conditions our genetic expression,
moment by moment.’
If each gene were a colour or a sound, a nice way to think of things is
that different states of mind produce an infinite variety of tones. In effect,
your body hums to the tune of your mind.
Overruling Our  Genes
Given that there’ s an effect of our mind on our genes, outside of the
relatively small number of true genetic diseases, perhaps we needn’t live so
much in fear if we have a family history of a disease. A change  in lifestyle,
attitude, behaviour or mind-set could perhaps overrule some of the ‘bad’
genes that we might have inherited.
For exam ple, let’s say a person is born into a family with a history of
heart disease, with genes that make their risk of heart disease higher than
average. This doesn’ t automatically mean that they’ll develop heart disease.
A percentage risk quoted is an average; the true risk for a particular person
varies depending on a number of factors, including their diet, lifestyle,
attitude and stress habits.
A positiv e change in attitude and/or lifestyle would alter the environment
in their body , affecting numerous genes in the brain and throughout the
body . This could cause some of the ‘bad’  genes to be turned down, activated
much less than in a dif ferent person who was prone to less healthy habits.
If we consider some of the resea rch reported in Chapter 1, where attitude
was associated with disease risk, developing a positive attitude, being more
optimistic, cutting down on hostility , cutting down on complaining, being
more accepting of life and peop le, focusing on things that you’re grateful
for, sharing, being kind and even developing a warm disposition towards
people all have beneficial effects. In many cases where statistics were
quoted, ‘bad’  genes will have been turned down in numerous people who
might have been more at risk than others, but who had indulged in healthier
mental, emotional and physical habits than their previous relatives.
Lifestyle affects our genes. A healthy diet, cutting down on toxins and
stimulants and having good levels of exercise all make a positive difference.
Living like this can improve the chance that genes that migh t otherwise
increase a person’ s risk of heart disease or cancer may be less active or lay
dormant altogether .
Attitude, diet and lifestyle run in families as much as genetics do. The
good thing about this is that we have a choice about our attitu de, diet and
lifestyle. If a person with ‘heart disease genes’  (genes that increase the risk
of developing heart disease) adopted the same diet, lifestyle, attitude and
stress habits as previous family  members who developed the disease, then
their genes migh t likely be similarly activated as they were in their family
members.
So, the person might be as likely to develop heart disease as their family
members were. But in many cases, this occurs not entirely because of their
genetics but because of their diet, lifestyle, attitude and stress habits.
Genetics, in many cases, play a much smaller role than we’ve previously
believed.
There are, of course, some exceptions. Some people with heart disease
genes and a poor diet and lifesty le never develop heart problems and some
people without those genes and with a great diet and lifestyle do; but
overruling our genes is true in a very broad sense.
So, if your family has a history of heart problems or cancer , examine
your attitude, how you think about people, how you treat peop le, how you
feel, your stress  levels, your diet, your exercise levels and how much you
drink or smoke, and make any positive changes that are necessary . And
consult your doctor to get some good health advice.
The Mind–Stem Cell Interface
Continuing with the mind–gene effect, the fact that states of mind can
influence rates of healing suggests that states of mind influence  the growth
of stem cells, because stem cells have DNA.
Of course, to re-emphasize, I’m not suggesting that the mind is some
kind of magnetic force that floats into cells and its ‘ener gy’ activates the
genes, but that through a chain of events that starts with a mental or
emotional state,  one of the things that occurs is that particular genes are
switched on or of f.
Stem cells are cells that morph into any type of cell – like flowers
without a head. They have only a stem and are able to grow different heads.
In this way, a stem cell could become a bone cell, an immune cell, a skin
cell, a heart cell, a blood cell or even a neuron. As necessar y genes are
activated, the stem cells grow into the cells that they’re required to become.
You may be familiar with the ethical debates over using embry onic stem
cells to treat some diseases. Once transplanted into, say, the liver,
embryonic stem cells become liver cells. Transplanted into the heart, the
same stem cells would become heart cells instead. Thus, transplanting stem
cells can in theory encourage the growth of damaged tissue anywhere in the
body .
It’s long been known that bone  marrow stem cells morph into immune
cells, which help us to fight infection. And earlier we learned about
neurogenesis. There’ s evidence to suggest that the stem cells that become
neurons begin their lives in the bone marrow too. Some research has shown
that when skin wounds heal, stem cells travel from the bone marrow and
morph into skin cells. There’ s also evidence that stem cells travel from the
bone marrow and morph into heart cells, thus regenerating damaged heart
muscle.
As we know , neurogenesis is accelerated by novel experiences, powerful
emotional states, spiritual experiences and exercise. Therefore, it’s logical
to assum e that in these situations a person’ s mental or emotional state is
having an effect upon stem cells (through a chain of events that starts with
the mind). It’s also known that stress can interfere with neuroge nesis. Stress
also slow s the healing process, which suggests that it might turn down the
genes on stem-c ell DNA  that are required for it to morph into the cell type
required for healing.
Therefore, it’s highly likely that the mind can either encourage stem cells
to morph into new cells or it can interfere with the process. Indeed, in
studies of the heart, high levels of stress are known to lower the levels of
endothelial progenitor cells (a type of stem cell) that are destined to line
blood vessel walls. Thus, since stress can affect stem cells, it’s highly likely
that many other tones of our mental and emotional states do so too.
From studies on institutionalize d children who’ve been deprived of love
and affection, we know that they tend to be smaller than other children their
age. They’re shorter in stature, their head circumference is smaller , and they
even have a smaller heart. In a process known as cardiomyogenesis, where
stem cells produce heart muscl e cells, the hormone oxytocin plays a key
role. If there’ s not enough of it around, then cardiomyogenesi s is slowed.
Oxytocin itself is produced in much lower quantities in children who’ve
been deprived of love.
In a hopeful study entitled ‘Evidence for Massive Catchup Following
International Adoption’, scientists found that growth accelerated in children
who were foster ed or adopted early enough in their lives. It’s almost certain
that part of this process was down to how the children were feeling – due to
the increased love, connection and parental responsiveness – and the fact
that this would lead to increased production of growth hormones and
oxytocin through activation of the growth hormone and oxytocin genes.
Again, why am I emphasizing the genetic side of things? In part, it’s
because we’ve seemingly inherited the idea that the mind is impotent.
Through emphas is of some of the more seemingly exotic consequences of a
person’ s state of mind, perhaps we can learn to have more faith in ourselves
than we might have done in the past. Not at the expense of medical advice,
of course, but in harmony with it.
In his excellent book The Psychobiol ogy of Gene Expression , award-
winning scientis t Ernest L. Ross i writes, ‘Many of the so-called miracles of
healing via spiritual practices and therapeutic hypnosis probably occur
via… gene expression in stem cells throughout the brain and body’.
The mind really  does have an incredible ability to affect the body . In the
next chapter we’ll learn of some of the new scientific evidence for the
physical ef fects of visualization on the body .
Chapter 6
The Power of Imagination and
Observation
‘Visualization is daydr eaming with a purpose.’
BO BENNETT
In a fascinating study conducted  by Fabrizio Benedetti from the University
of Turin, volunt eers had an analgesic cream rubbed on either their left or
right hand (or feet). At least, that’s what they’d been told. In fact, it was a
placebo and not much dif ferent from everyday moisturizing cream.
Then they had capsaicin injected  into both their hands – it’s the chemical
that makes chilli peppers burn, so you can imagine how that might have
felt. But even though the volunteers had a placebo cream rubbed on their
hands, the pain level was much lower on the hand the cream was applied to,
but not on the other . For example, if they had the cream rubbed on their left
hand and not their right hand, then the pain was greatly reduced on their left
hand but not on their right hand.
Next, Benedetti looked at the brains of the volunteers. Just as we learned
in Chapter 2 that the brain produces its own natural painkillers (endogenous
opiates) when a person thinks they’re getting a painkiller , the volunteers’
brains did so in this study too. Amazingly , though, the opiates were only
produced in the region of the brain corresponding to the hand on which the
placebo cream was rubbed. So, if they had the cream rubbed on their left
hand, the left-hand region of the brain produced endogenous opiates, but
they weren’ t produced in the right-hand region.
Benedetti wrote  that ‘… endogenous opioids do not act throu ghout the
nervous system but only on those neural circuits linking specific
expectations to specific placebo responses’.
In other words, there was a selective (focused) placebo effect in the
region of the body they were focused on, or expected pain relief from,
whether that was the left or right hand, and the brain produ ced its own
natural painkille rs in that specific region of the brain and not in any other
regions.
In Chapter 2, I explained that the brain produces what it needs to produce
to give us what  we expect to happen. It turns out that it also produces it
wher e it needs to produce it. If you place your attention on any part of your
body , like your finger , toe, ear or tongue, for example, that part of the body
‘feels’  it, in that it’s stimulated and so is the corresponding region of the
brain connected to it.
In similar research, conducted before Benedetti’ s, scientists from the
University of Connecticut in the USA  induced pain in a finger or hand of 56
volunteers. They  had a placebo  cream rubbed on either a finger or hand,
which they also believed was an analgesic, and their pain was greatly
reduced in the finger or hand, specifically wherever the placebo  cream was
applied.
When a child falls and scrapes their elbow or knee, and their parent
‘kisses it better ’, the reason the pain diminishes is because the child’ s brain
is producing its own natural painkillers in the elbow or knee region and this
reduces the pain in the elbow or knee. It’s not just all in the mind. In a very
real way , ener gy flows where attention goes.
When we have a pain and receive a placebo – whether that’s a cream, a
pill, an injection, a plaster with a cartoon drawn on it or even some kind
words – our awareness of where the pain is located and our expectation that
it’ll go away cause pain to reduce specifically where our awareness is
directed and nowhere else.
The same type of thing would occur if a person had two different
conditions and was given a placebo for one of them, believin g it to be a
drug. In Chapter 2 we learned of the study where a person was given an
inhaler that they believed contained allergens and pollen and went on to
develop asthma symptoms as well as hay fever symptoms. Next, they were
given an inhale r and told that it only contained allergens. This time they
only developed asthma sympto ms. In the third experiment they were told
that the inhaler contained allergens and pollen, and once again, they
developed asthma symptoms and hay fever symptoms.
The person’ s knowledge of what was supposed to happen directed which
chemicals were released and what, therefore, actually occurred. So, if a
person who had asthma and hay fever was given a placebo to relieve asthma
symptoms but believed it to be a drug, their asthma symptoms would likely
disappear but their hay fever symptoms would remain. Conversely , if they
were told that the placebo was for hay fever , their hay fever symptoms
would disappear but their asthma symptoms would remain.
Just as in the pain experiments, over and above the effect of a drug, our
awareness of what’ s wrong with us and what’ s supposed to happen when
we receive medicine seems to be a directing force that instruc ts the brain
and body on which chemicals shoul d be released, which genes should be
activated and deactivated, where chemicals should flow to and, therefore,
what actually happens.
The Brain Is Connected to the Body
Every part of your body is connected to your brain. Nerves connect the
brain to the skin, muscles, bones, tendons and internal organs.  This is the
reason why when someone touches a part of your body you can feel it. But
as well as touch being registered  in the brain, just thinking about most parts
of your body has the same kind of effect. This is why people under
hypnosis, or trained meditators, can increase the temperature of one hand if
they imagine it hotter and also why some pain goes away if we’re
distracted.
Though this was once the realm of the mystical and dismissed as the stuff
of quacks, a great deal of resea rch has now focused upon it. Neuroscience
studies show that if we think about moving a part of the body , the area of
the brain that governs that part is activated. Thinking about moving your
hand, for instance, activates the ‘hand map’  in the brain.
Publishing in the Journal of Neur ophysiology  in 2003 , scient ists at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden (where Nobel Prize winners in
Physiology or Medicine give their Nobel Lectures) demonstrated that when
we imagine moving our fingers, toes or tongue, for instance, the area of our
brain that governs each part is activated.
Using Our  Mind to Build Our  Muscles
If you think about any part of your body over and over again it has an even
more powerful effect. We learned in the last chapter that repetition of a
movement increases the size of a brain map, or the thickness of an area of
the brain, but the same thing occurs when we just imagine  a movement.
In a study led by Alvaro Pascual-Leone, a neurology professor at Harvard
University , volunteers played a five-fingered combination of notes on a
piano, up and down a simple scale, repeatedly , over and over again, for two
hours each day for five consec utive days. They had their brains scanned
each day, during which the scientists focused on the region of the brain
connected to the finger muscles . That region grew like a muscle, which as
we learned earlier , is neuroplasticity .
A separa te group of volunteers imagined playing the notes instead. They
also had their brains scanned each day. Amazingly , the same regions of the
brain had also changed, and to exactly the same degree. Their brains didn’ t
seem to be making a distinction between real and imaginary , whether they’d
actually played the notes or had imagined playing the notes. To the brain, it
seemed that real and imaginary were much the same thing.
Given that the volunteers’  brains were changing to much the same extent,
regardless of whether they played the notes or imagined playing them,
many scientists have wondered, would the same thing occur in the muscles?
Would muscles also get stronger if a person imagined, say, lifting weights?
It turns out that they do!
A 2004 study by scientists at the Department of Biomedical Engineering
at the Lerner Research Institute in Cleveland, USA, for example, showed a
substantial increase in strength through imagined exercise. In the study ,
volunteers stretched and contrac ted the little finger of one hand repeatedly ,
for 15 minutes a day , five days a week, for three months.
Lifting a finger can be quite hard work, so the volunteers actually did 15
extensions and contractions at a time, followed by a 20-second rest period.
They had their strength measure d at the start of the three-month period, and
again at the end, and the scient ists found that the average improvement in
strength in the group was 53 per cent.
A separate group did imaginary extensions and contractions of their little
finger instead, but for the same  15 minutes a day, five days a week, for
three months. They also had their strength tested. Amazingl y, they had
grown in strength by 35 per cent… and they hadn’ t even lifted a finger!
Someone I know who was quite sceptical about this kind of effect once
pointed out to me that this result wasn’ t as much as the 53 per cent gained
by those  who actually did the extensions and contractions. However , I
pointed out to him that it also wasn’ t 0 per cent. They had gained 35 per
cent in physical strength, really , by not lifting a finger .
While I was working in the pharmaceutical industry , I spent some of my
spare time as an athletics coach with one of the UK’s largest athletics clubs
(Sale Harriers Manchester). A few years later, I mentioned this to a young
sprinter who’d told me he had to have an operation on his shoulder and had
been advised that the post-op recovery period would put him out of training
for the whole season.
He feared losing strength in his muscles, so I recommended that he visit
the gym in his mind. I explained exactly how he should do this: he should
do lifts as if he really was in the gym, and he should even imagine that he
was improving upon his PBs (personal bests). Not only did he recover from
his injur y much  faster than he ordinarily would have, but he returned to
training almost as fast and as strong as he had been before his operation.
And his improvement was rapid. Within a short time, in fact, he was picked
to run for his country for the first time.
Research has in fact shown that if we imagine lifting heavy weights, the
brain and muscles are stimulated more than if we imagine lifting lighter
weights. In a 2007 study by scientists at the University of Lyon in France,
volunteers either lifted or imagined lifting dumbbells of different weights.
Significantly , the scientists found that the activation of the muscles was
appropriate for the type of weight that the volunteers imagined lifting. If
they imagined lifting a heavy weight, for instance, their muscles were
activated more than if they imagined lifting a lighter weight.
Athletes have understood for a long time that muscles are affected by
visualization, and therefore mentally seeing themselves achieving at the
highest level frequently separates champions from the athletes that history
doesn’ t record.
Brain–Computer  Interfaces
One of the powerful application s to evolve from the research findings that
imagining moving a part of the body activates that specific part of the brain
is in prosthetics. Much research uses brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) that
record the stimulation of neurons caused by imagined movements.
If, for example, a person imagines taking a step forwards with their right
leg, the right leg part of the brain gets activated, since the brain doesn’ t
distinguish between real and imaginary . The BCI records the specific
location of brain activation and sends a signal to a prosthesis on that leg to
move each time that region is activated.
For example, if the BCI contained a simple grid of A, B, C, D versus 1, 2,
3, 4 – a bit like a small chessboard with the letters along the top and the
numbers running  vertically – and, say, grid location A2 correspo nded to the
right leg, then every time the BCI recorded activation in A2 that occurred
when the person imagined moving their right leg, it would be interpreted as
a comm and for the prosthesis to move the leg. Initial research was done
using virtual-reality simulators with which tetraplegic patients learned to
control avatars with their mind.
Indeed, researchers from Graz University of Technology in Austria
published a 2006 paper entitled  ‘Walking from thought’, where paralysed
people were able to make avata rs walk down a virtual street in a virtual-
reality simulator just by imagining moving their own legs.
In some  pioneering research published in the premier scientific journal
Natur e in 2006, a tetraplegic person with a tiny chip inserted into his brain
to record the locations of brain activation was able to move a cursor on a
computer screen  and even open  an email with his mind. He also played a
computer game, controlled a robotic arm and changed the channel and
volume of a TV while he was having a conversation.
The chip recorded specific locations of brain activation as the person
focused his attention on different parts of his body and the BCI linked these
activation regions with controls in the room. So, if he imagined his right
hand, the chip would record activation in the right-hand region of the brain
and the BCI would read this as an instruction to, say, increase the volume of
the TV.
Mirr or Neur ons
The brain doesn’ t distinguish between whether you’re doing something or
just imagining  doing it, and it also doesn’ t distinguish much between
whether you’re doing somethin g or watching  someone else do it. Action
observation, as it’s known, where we watch someone else performing an
action of some sort, activates the watcher ’s brain as if they were  performing
the action themselves.
In some  early research in 2001, scientists at the University of Parma in
Italy, publishing in the European Journal of Neur oscience , scanne d the
brains of volunteers as they simply watched people move their hands,
mouth or feet, for example. But while they watched, the areas of their own
brains that controlled the hand, mouth and feet movements were activated
as if they were the ones making the movements.
Taking it further , in a fascinating 2006 paper called ‘Bend it like
Beckham: embodying the motor skills of famous athletes’, scientists at the
Centre for Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience at the University of Wales
found that we don’t even have to watch people moving. We only need to see
a photo of someone known for a particular skill and our brain and muscles
are stimulated according to our knowledge of how they move. Looking at a
photo of a famous footballer , for instance, activates parts of the brain that
govern leg and foot muscles.
As unbelievable as it sounds, watching a great athlete perform makes you
better at that event. We grow in the direction of the skills of the person we
watch. Watching an expert golfer makes you a better golfer , but watching
someone not as good makes you more like them instead. If you want to
learn something, there’ s a lot to be said for hanging out with people who are
masters at it.
And just as visualization of our muscles working improves our strength,
so does watching muscles working. In an experiment similar to the one
described earlier  in this chapter , scientists conducted an experiment where
volunteers watched other volunt eers stretching an elastic band between their
index and middle fingers. This was done in sets of 25 repetitions every two
days for 10 days.
In the group who stretched the elastic band, muscle strength in the fingers
of their right hand (the one used) increased by 50 per cent. But, amazingly ,
in the group who merely watched the training, finger strength in their right
hand increased by 32 per cent. Not only had they not lifted a finger , they
hadn’ t even imagined it.
If you couldn’ t be bothered exercising at the gym, could you sit in the
café, watch everyone else exercising and gain some improvement? As
strange as this sounds, the answer is yes. Actual physical training,
imagining training and watchin g training activate similar regions of the
brain.
In a pioneering study into stroke rehabilitation published in the journal
Neur oImage , scientis ts from  the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein in
Germany studie d eight stroke patients over a four-week period as they
watched able people perform routine actions, like drinking a cup of coffee
or eating an apple. The patients also received normal rehabilitation during
this period. At the end of the four weeks, the patients who had watched the
actions had improved much more than the patients who hadn’ t and,
incredibly , MRI brain scans showed that their damaged brain maps were
actually regenerating.
The brain mirro rs what we pay attention to. If someone is happy , for
instance, and you’re in their company , your brain mirrors the movements of
the two smile muscles – the zygomaticus major , which pulls the lips into a
smile, and the orbicularis oculi  at the side of the eyes, which  we crease
when we smile broadly and genuinely .
The more time you spend with the person, the more mirroring goes on,
and the happier  you feel becau se your brain stimulates your own smile
muscles. It’s called emotional contagion. I wrote a lot about different kinds
of emotional contagion (and how to stop the negative kind) in my book The
Contagious Power of Thinking .
The neurons in the brain that are stimulated in emotional contagion and
action observation are aptly called ‘mirror neurons’. They help us to learn
new things as we watch people  doing them. For instance, in a 2004 study ,
scientists at the Department of Neuroscience at the University of Parma,
Italy, took brain scans of volun teers who’d never played the guitar while
they were watching someone playing one. The scans showe d that their
mirror neurons were activated as if they themselves were actually playing.
Even listening to sentences being spoken that describe motion activates
our brain as if we were doing the movements. Scientist s from the
Department of Neuroscience at the University of Parma showed that when
volunteers listen ed to people talking about hand movements, the area of the
brain that controlled their hand movements was activated. When listening to
people talking about foot movements, the area of the brain corresponding to
foot movements was similarly activated.
I tested this out a couple of times with groups of people. I had them close
their eyes as I spent a few moments describing movements of either the left
or right arm and shoulder that included stretches and rotations. After only a
minute or two of doing this, most people reported that the shoulder they
listened to descriptions of being stretched felt more flexible.
This is why if we see someone hurt themselves, we feel a twinge. If we
see someone fall over on their ankle, we may feel a sudden twinge from our
ankle right up our leg. It’s also partly why (empathy is involved here as
well) we can come out in symp athy with a person who’ s in pain and get
phantom pains and symptoms of illness when a loved one is suffering.
Some men even experience contractions when their wives are in labour .
We can use this kind of thing to our advantage. During a workshop I
taught, a lady shared an amazing  technique that her three-year -old daughter
used to avoid scratching her face when she had chickenpox.
Her child’ s face was so itchy , she told me, and having read the first
edition of How Your Mind  Can Heal Your Body , she was struck with the
idea of using a teddy bear for scratching. She asked her daughter to go find
a teddy bear whose face tickled as much as hers did. Whe n the child
returned with the teddy , her mother told her that she could scratch teddy any
time her face became itchy and that it would help stop her own itch.
And that’s exactly what the little girl did. Amazingly , the itch faded on
her own face, and she didn’ t scratch it once.
Chapter 7
Visualization for Rehabilitation and
Sports
‘Few things in the world ar e mor e powerful than
a positive push. A smile. A word of optimism and
hope. A “You can do it” when things get tough.’
RICHARD  M. D EVOS
Visualization, mental practice, mental imagery , guided imagery , motor
imagery and kinaesthetic imag ery all describe the same overall kind of
thing – the use of the mind to imagine something. Throughout this book, I
use these terms interchangeabl y, but mostly I use visualization, just for
simplicity , since  it’s a term more people are familiar with. When I use one
of the other terms, it’s usually because that’s what the researche rs in a study
specifically called it.
Over the past few decades, there’ s been a massive surge in research into
the use of visual ization and a lot of it is applied to rehabilitation and sports.
In 1980, just 122 studies had been published in the scientific journals, but
by 2010, that number had reached more than 20,000. By early 2018, it had
increased to 44,000, accordin g to a PubMed search of the scientific
literature that I conducted while writing this book, using the same search
term of ‘mental practice’  as was used in 2010.
Great strides forward have been made in that time, and there’ s room for
many new avenues of research . This chapter includes some of the key
findings so far .
Neur orehabilitation
‘Mental imagery could be a viable intervention for str oke
patients, given its benefits of being safe, cost-effective and
rendering multiple and unlimited practice opportunities.’
This was the conclusion of a 2014 meta-analysis of the scientific literature
on the use of mental imagery in rehabilitation from a strok e. Research
studies on stroke rehabilitation vary a little, with some lasting just three
weeks, some six, and others as much as 12 weeks in duration, but most
studies show a clinically significant effect of mental imagery , and patients
benefiting regardless of whether the stroke was recent or several years ago.
In one study conducted at the Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation at the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine in the
USA, 16 chronic  stroke patients listened to a tape that guided them through
visualization of the hand, arm and shoulder of their impaired side for 20
minutes at a time, followed by five minutes of progressive muscle
relaxation (relaxing muscle groups one at a time) and five minutes of
refocusing into the room. The imagery they used was reach ing for and
grasping a cup or other object, turning the pages of a book and proper use
of a writing utensil.
The visualization (imagery) sessions were done twice a week
immediately following a 30-min ute physical therapy session. To serve as a
comparison, a separate group of 16 patients instead received a 30-minute
muscle relaxation session after their physical therapy session.
By the end of the six-week programme, the patients who’d visua lized had
made significant gains. Compa red with the group who only did muscle
relaxation after their physiotherapy session, daily arm function had
significantly improved and arm impairment was significantly lessened. The
authors of the study pointed out that the improvements obtained through
visualization were clinically significant.
Studies on the use of visualization to aid rehabilitation following a stroke
demonstrate that it’s effective if used in addition  to physical therapy, not
instead of physical therapy . This is a very important point and applies to the
use of visualization for any condition. Visualization is not a substitute for
medical advice, but something that we use in addition to  medical advice.
No matter what therapy or drugs a person receives for an injury or
medical condition, they have to think! That’ s the nature of the mind. The
mind will wander in one direc tion or another . While wandering towards
stressful thoughts might not be helpful, when the mind is focused in a
positive way the benefits can be positive. In effect, visualizatio n guides us
in the content  of our thinking, targeting it in a positive, constructive way.
But in a way that we’re now learning also has direct effects of its own,
beyond simply sparing us some stress.
A 2014 study conducted at the Capital Medical University of
Rehabilitation Medicine in China compared physical practice plus mental
imagery of hand movement with physical practice alone in 10 recent stroke
patients. The imagery sessions were conducted five days a week for four
weeks. The researchers found that mental imagery plus physical practice
was significantly better than physical practice alone; this was consistent
with other studies.
But on examini ng brain scans of the patients, they also found that the
improvements in hand movement were actually consistent with increased
activation of the damaged brain region, demonstrating the brain’ s amazing
capacity for regeneration.
Research in the general area of stroke rehabilitation indeed suggests the
brain has a powerful capacity to reorganize and regenerate. It’s this
‘plasticity’  that allows a restoration of movement to the patient.
This ability of the brain to reorganize and regenerate is important in the
recovery from any kind of injur y that requires neurorehabilitati on. In 2007,
scientists taugh t visualization to patients who’d suffered a spinal cord
injury . Ten tetra/paraplegic patients were instructed to imagine moving their
tongue and feet, and brain scans revealed significant activation in key
regions as if they’d been movin g. The authors, publishing in Experimental
Brain Research, thus recommen ded that visualization be used as part of any
restorative therapy for spinal cord injuries.
Visualization has also helped people with Parkinson’ s disease. In a study
published in the journal Neur orehabilitation and Neural Repair , patients
given one-hour physical therapy  sessions twice a week for 12 weeks plus
visualization were compared with patients only receiving the physical
therapy sessions. After 12 weeks, the patients who’d visualized were much
more improved than the patients who hadn’ t.
How to Visualize Being Better  at a Sport
As well as being  a powerful aid to neurorehabilitation, visualiz ation is also
an excellent way to improve a sports skill, as we touched upon in the
previous chapter .
A few years ago, I spoke at a corporate event right after Sally Gunnell,
OBE, winner of the gold medal in the 400m hurdles at the 1992 Olympics.
During her talk, Sally said: ‘70 per cent of winning an Olympic  gold medal
is mental.’  By that, she was referring to attitude and determination. She also
said that, for her, a large part was daily visualization. She visualized
running the race, over and over again, for a whole year after coming second
at the 1991 World Championsh ips. She imagined the mechanics of lifting
her leg over the hurdle, running at pace, even the exhausting part towards
the end of the race where she imagined holding her technique despite the
pain. She credited visualization as one of the keys to her gold medal.
Visualization is used extensively in many different sports, including
athletics, footbal l, tennis, golf, basketball, even ice skating, where the sports
performer , like Gunnell did, mentally practises or mentally rehearses a
particular action. For example, a basketball player might repetitively
visualize making  a particular shot, imagining the feeling of holding the ball,
the movement of their arm and finger as they apply the right pressure to
spin the ball.
A golfer  might focus on the feeling of swinging through the ball and
imagine the trajectory as it flies towards the hole. For example, in one
study , volunteers  were assessed in making a golf chip shot onto the green (a
distance of 50m/165ft to the hole). One group did physical practice of the
shot, another group did physical practice plus visualization practice of the
shot, and a third group served as control. The group who combined physical
practice with visualization practice were much more improv ed than the
group who did physical practice alone.
A similar kind of study compa red four groups of people attempting a
handball shot. One group practised making the shot, one group visualized
making the shot, one group did a combination of the two – phys ical practice
plus mental practice – and a fourth group served as a control  group. The
researchers found that physical practice plus visualization was better than
physical practice alone, which in turn was better than visualization practice
alone, which was better than doing nothing (control group).
Visualization is so effective in sport because the brain doesn’ t seem to
distinguish real from imaginary; therefore, supplementing phys ical training
with imagining performing a specific movement can have the effect of
having done extra training.
There’ s one important thing, however , that we need to get right when
visualizing. We need to know what  to visua lize. In the stroke rehabilitation
studies, visualization was of movements that the patients already knew how
to do, like lifting a utensil or taking a drink from a cup. In sports,
visualization comes easier to elite performers than it does to novices
because the elite performers know exactly what to visualize. But novices
don’t always know what they should be imagining as they haven’ t learned
much of the technical aspects of a particular sport.
Therefore, if a novice were to use visualization but visualized a particular
set of movemen ts incorrectly , they’d improve in their ability to perform the
movement incorrectly . They’d get better at making a flawed motion because
that’s what they were imagining. Their muscles would simply respond to
what they’d imagined.
This is where mirror neuron s can come in really handy . Action
observation can help people refine their images and get their visualizations
more technicall y precise. As we learned in the previous chapter, action
observation is the repetitive observation of a physical movement. The
observation stimulates mirror neurons in the brain, which helps the brain
learn the movement much faster . The main thing to get correct, then, is what
you choose to observe.
The beneficial use of action observation in sports has been shown in a
number of studies. Tae-Ho Kim,  formerly of Keimyung University of South
Korea but now at the Neurocognition and Action-Biomechanics Research
Group in Bielefeld, Germany , studied the effect of action observation and
mental imagery on the accuracy of golf putting.
Sixty male volunteers were involved in the study and were randomly
assigned to one of six groups that would measure the effects of action
observation and mental imagery  on putting performance. Each group of 10
participants did either action observation (AO), mental imagery (MI),
physical practice (PP), action observation plus physical practice (AO-PP),
mental imagery plus physical practice (MI-PP), or they were in a control
group and didn’ t do practice of any kind, to serve as a baseline.
Each day for three days, the AO group watched a video of an expert
golfer making 60 puts (thus observing a total of 180 puts). The MI group,
on the other hand, imagined putting 60 times each day. The PP group did 60
physical puts each day .
On each of the three days, the AO-PP  group watched 30 puts and
practised 30 puts (thus they observed 90 puts and attempted 90 puts over
three days, making a total of 180). The MI-PP  group visualized 30 puts and
practised 30 puts each day. The control group did nothing. Measurements of
each person’ s putting accuracy  were made one day after the practice
sessions and again a week afterwards.
First, the study found that action observation combined with physical
practice was significantly better than all the other practice meth ods. It was
much better than physical practi ce alone. In other words, observing  90 puts
before attempting 90 puts was much better than attempting 180 puts.
Action observation helped refine  the technique so that the performance of
the practised puts was more technically correct. You’d be mistaken in
thinking that action observation is simply the conscious, analytical
breaking-down of the shot into its components, where the observer makes
analytical notes regarding what he or she should or shouldn’ t do. It’ s not.
The reason action observation works is because, as we learn ed in the
previous chapter , observing a golf shot performed correctly stimulates the
Mirror Neuron System (MNS),  which then stimulates in the observer the
same muscles used by the person carrying out the correctly made shot. It
stimulates the muscles precisel y in the same way, with the same subtle
rotations, the same amount of weight and shifting of balance as the player
whose actions they observe. Thus, even in the absence of playing as many
shots, the muscles learn  how to move in the correct way. Consequently ,
learning (and rehabilitation) is accelerated.
The second point to note from the study is that action observation plus
physical practice was better than mental imagery (visualization) plus
physical practice. Part of the reason why mental imagery can be highly
effective in stroke rehabilitation  is that the patients are familiar with the
movements they’re visualizing making. They have experience of lifting
objects, turning the pages of a book, etc. But novice golfers aren’t quite as
familiar with the technicalities of holding and swinging a putter . If a novice
golfer , however , had the correct ‘mental representation’  – that is, if they
knew what  to visualize – technically , they would have putted more
accurately .
This was tested in a follow-up experiment led by Kim where he
examined the relationship between mental representation and ability . Using
a simila r design to the previou s study , but using a sample of 40 novice
golfers this time, he again studied the effect of action observation and
imagery on golf-putting performance.
This time, the golfers were placed into four groups. At the start, all four
groups had some practice, makin g 15 attempts to put the ball. One group of
10 players then received action observation training, where they observed a
put made by an expert golfer 60 times a day for three days; one group
received imager y training, where they visualized making 60 puts a day for
three days; one group did physical practice, where they attempted 60
practice puts a day; and one group did no practice at all, for comparison
purposes.
This time, Kim assessed the volunteers’  mental representation structure –
that is, the accuracy of their mental representation – and compared it with
their putting accuracy at the start and after three days of training , and again
two days later .
The groups who did action observation and mental imagery improved
greatly over the three days, as did, of course, the group who did physical
practice. Key, though, was that there was a significantly positive connection
between mental representation structure and putting performance in the
group who did action observation training. In other words, those who did
action observation improved in their mental representation structure – they
refined their mental images – and that gain translated into more accurate
putting.
Having a good mental representation helps us in two ways. It helps us in
our practised and unconscious visualizations. The latter is where a person
might quite unconsciously simu late aspects of a golf put while standing in
the queue of a coffee shop or while talking with colleagues. The former is
in makin g the actual shot. Mental representation has an immediate effect on
how we hold our muscles when we come to play an actual shot.
Thus, observing  an action executed expertly allows a person to have a
clear image of what to visualiz e. Numerous studies have shown without
question that visualization impr oves sporting skills, but what’ s key in each
case is knowing  what  to visualize. Observing someon e making errors will
teach you to carry out the action yourself with the same errors. Getting a
mental representation correct, especially in sports, is important. We can use
imagery to get our mental repre sentation right, but it’s often advantageous
to first observe actions being performed by an expert.
Putting it into practice
I experie nced this kind of thing in my own tennis practice. I took up tennis
during the summer of 2016, shortly after moving to Dunblan e in central
Scotland, the childhood home of former tennis world number -ones Andy
and Jamie Murray .
My only previous tennis experience was swinging a tennis racquet
(badly) a few times as a teenager . As an adult in my mid-forti es, learning
the skill was quite a challenge. I joined the club leagues in 2017 and easily
lost all of my matches; my most frequent losing score was 6–1, 6–0.
So, I decided to try an action observation and mental imagery experiment
on myse lf. I knew that the tennis serve is one of the most  technically
complex moves in sport and that I was particularly bad at it, so I was a
prime candidate for action observation and mental imagery training.
I initially tried visualization on its own, but I found it very difficult. I had
trouble visualizing because I struggled to accurately imagine the correct
movements, mostly because I had no experience of making a technically
correct serve. My mental representation was way of f.
So, I began action observation training. I obtained a short (five-second)
video of Andy Murray hitting some serves, and I watched it thousands of
times (100 times a day in five sets of 20). I drilled in the correct technical
movements with the assistance of my Mirror Neuron System until I could
effortlessly visualize what I wanted to visualize – a good serve. Then I used
visualization to supplement the action observation sessions. I also did serve
practice sessions once a week.
The result was dramatic. My overall game improved a little, but my serve
improved quite substantially . My serve became technically more proficient;
I hit the ball more cleanly , accurately , with spin and with more pace. And,
importantly , I won more matche s than I lost. Within a few months, I’d gone
from bottom of the fourth division to finishing top of the fourth division.
Although we’re  talking about the fourth division here (I’m clearly not an
expert tennis player), the impor tant thing to take from this is my degree of
improvement through the use of action observation and mental imagery .
Chapter 8
Visualization to Enhance the Immune
System
‘Broadly , the immune system and
our nervous system ar e in constant
dialogue, each affecting the other .’
DANIEL  M. D AVIS
Visualization has been shown to improve immune function. Many people,
however , will assume that the improvements are down to a reduction in
stress while a person does visualization. That makes a lot of sense because
visualization is usually done while relaxing, and relaxation does reduce
stress. In so doing it allows the immune system to function more optimally .
But there’ s more to the ef fect of visualization than that.
In an effort to show some specific effects of visualization, sever al studies
have employed imagery that’s targeted towards the immune system. The
goal in these studies was to compare a relaxation visualization with
visualizing the immune system specifically .
Immune System Targeted Imagery
In one such study , Jeanne Achterber g, while at the University of Texas in
the USA, enlisted 45 volunteers  to use imagery to attempt to increase levels
of secretory immunoglobulin A (s-IgA), a component of the immune system
that’s been shown to be an accurate indicator of overall immune function. A
separate group performed genera l relaxation imagery that wasn’ t focused on
the immune system.
The volunteers listened to a guided imagery tape every two days for six
weeks – either targeted towards the immune system or of pleasant, relaxing
scenes. The visualization group was shown drawings and photographs that
depicted the immune system in operation, as an example of what to
visualize so they’d have a good mental representation. They were shown B-
cells moving out of the bone marrow and thousands of double-Y -shaped s-
IgA antibodies being secreted from plasma cells.
At the end of the six-week period, s-IgA  levels increased in both groups
compared with a control group, which was to be expected. But significantly ,
the levels in those who did the targeted immune system visualization were
more than double the levels of those who did the non-tar geted visualization.
Visualization of the immune system had selectively increased the amount of
s-IgA  over and above that obtained through relaxation alone.
The researchers also noted a timescale, which is important in light of
other research discussed below . The s-IgA  levels rose relatively quickly in
both groups, but it took about three weeks before a significant difference in
s-IgA  levels between  the two groups began to emer ge.
While the above study asked participants to visualize s-IgA  antibodies, in
another study Achterber g enlisted volunteers to visualize specifi c cells of
the immune system in an attempt to increase their numbers. Thirty
volunteers were instructed to visualize either of two different types of white
blood cells – neutrophils or lymphocytes – in what the research team called
‘cell-specific’  imagery . This time, the volunteers focused on the shape of the
cells, where they were and their movements. The volunteers were
randomized to one of two groups (immune system visualization or
relaxation visualization) and visualized for 20 minutes a day over six
weeks.
After the six weeks, neutrophil and lymphocyte counts were taken. In the
group who visualized neutrophils, neutrophil numbers decreased  while
lymphocytes did not. In the group who visualized lymphocytes,
lymphocytes decreased while neutrophil numbers were uncha nged. There
appeared to be a clear effect from visualization, but it seemed to be going in
the opposite direction from what was expected.
Each cell type visualized decreased , whereas you might expect it to
increase, given that we’re talking about immune function and that an
increase is what you’d hope for in that, certainly in light of the s-IgA
research described above.
But the reason for the drop wasn’t an indication that the immun e system
had weakened, though: it was an indication that it was working. The
researchers proposed that the decreases were due to processes known as
margination and chemotaxis. This is where the cells drop out of the
bloodstream and move to sites in the body where they’re required to aid a
healing response.
Thus, the analysis, which essentially counted  neutrophils and
lymphocytes in the blood, detected a drop in levels of each cell type
visualized because many of the neutrophils and lymphocyt es were no
longer in the main circulation of blood. Rather than the visualization not
working, it seemed it was, in fact, enhancing the efficiency  of whichever
cell type the volunteers visualized.
The same thing has been observed by other researchers. For example, one
study used imagery to attempt to increase white blood cell (WBC) counts
(neutrophils, specifically) in 20 patients (10 males and 10 femal es) who had
depressed WBC counts due to illnesses. The patients involved had WBC
counts that had been consistently below the normal expected range for a
period of six months or more. The conditions included cancer , AIDS, viral
infections, sinusitis, endometriosis, aller gies, hepatitis and others.
Just as in the Achterber g study , WBC levels reduced. However , this was
just a temporary  effect. The duration of this study was much longer . The
counts reduced immediately post-test and five days later, but then increased
significantly over the following  three months, as measured at one month
(17 per cent increase), two months (31 per cent increase) and three months
(38 per cent increase).
The author of the study suggested, as did Achterber g in her study , that the
WBC counts initially dropped due to margination and chemotaxis. The
author wrote that visualization might not necessarily be having an effect on
the actual number  of cells, but more on what the cells were doing . So,
again, the initia l decreases were not real drops in the immune system but
actually indications that the immune system was working more ef ficiently .
The increases after two and three months could, however , have been a
real increase in WBC numbers, or they could even have been WBCs re-
entering the bloodstream after some of their ‘work’  was done.
At this point in time, research hasn’ t fully explored exactly  how the
process works and the sample sizes (the number of people in the studies)
have been relatively low. However , given the evidence presented
throughout this book, as well as the studies you will read about in the next
chapter – where immune system-tar geted visualization has been used by
cancer patients in randomized controlled trials – I believe that visualization
does seem to have a genuinely positive ef fect on the immune system.
The implication s of the phenomenon are huge, given that the immune
system is our main system for healing the body of injury , illness and
disease. If visualization is able to positively alter immune function, then it
might be said that it could potentially impact a great many medical
conditions.
Chapter 9
Visualization for Cancer and Other
Conditions
‘You ar e braver than you believe,
stronger than you seem, and
smarter than you think.’
A.A. M ILNE
Some studies have shown that visualization can reduce the severity of some
side effects of cancer treatment and also reduce the risk of reoccurrence of
cancer after treatment.
A 1999 randomized controlled study published in the British Journal of
Cancer , for example, examined the daily use of guided imagery in which
patients visualized their immune  system destroying cancer cells. The study
involved 96 women who’d been recently diagnosed with breast cancer that
was large or locally advanced and who were receiving six cycles of
chemotherapy .
As an aid to visualization and so they had a good mental representation,
the wom en were shown coloured cartoons depicting how the immune
system works. They also rated the vividness of their imagery . The main
measurements in the study were mood and quality of life and these were
assessed before each of the cycles of chemotherapy and again three weeks
after the sixth cycle. The study also measured the patients’  clinical
responses to chemotherapy after the six cycles.
Quality of life is often used as a measurement because it’s well known
that it’s a prognostic factor for survival; that is, quality of life is correlated
with the chance of recovery from a disease and also the chances of the
disease reoccurring. Indeed, studies have shown that a higher quality-of-life
rating is linked with survival of patients with early-stage breast cancer and
also advanced disease.
Quality of life is also sometimes associated with a patient’ s response to
chemotherapy . A study of women with advanced breast cancer , for instance,
found that quality of life was a predictor of their response to chemotherapy
and also their survival rates. The higher the reported quality-of-life rating,
the bette r the response to chemotherapy . In the same vein, stress is often
associated with a poorer response to chemotherapy .
Cancer diagnosis and treatment  also often leaves people with depressed
mood, leading to clinically significant depression and anxiety . This can
impact on their quality of life and can thus be related to their likelihood of
survival.
The results of the 1999 visualization study showed that quality-of-life
rating was much higher in the visualization group than in those who didn’ t
use visualization, which suggested that visualization might have increased
their chances of survival, and also reduced the likelihood of cancer
returning. And, just as in the studies of mental representation structure
earlier in this book, the women’ s clinical responses were correlated with the
quality of their visualizations . Those who reported the most vivid
visualizations had the greatest positive clinical response to the treatment.
Patients who used visualization  also had higher numbers of T-cells (key
components of the immune system) and enhanced levels of lymphokine-
activated killer (LAK) cell cytotoxicity . Cytotoxicity refers to the ability of
these ‘killer cells’  of the immune system to destroy cancer cells. Put simply ,
the immune system of patients who visualized their immune system seemed
to be working more optimally than in patients who didn’ t visualize.
The impact of visualization on the immune system durin g cancer
treatment has been reported by other researchers, too. A randomized
controlled trial (RCT) of 80 women with newly diagnosed large or locally
advanced breast cancer also used imagery of the immune system destroying
tumour cells, in addition to relaxation training. The women were shown
cartoons describ ing the process and were also encouraged to make their
own images. They also recorded the vividness of their visualizations on a
1–10 scale.
The women received chemoth erapy , surgery, radiotherapy and then
hormone therapy . Blood sample s were taken 10 times over 37 weeks and
several immune substances were measured. In the group who did
visualization, immune activity and cytotoxicity were increase d compared
with the group who didn’ t do the visualizations. Specifically , levels of
CD25+ (activate d T-cells), CD56+ (LAK cells) and CD3+ T lymphocyte
cells were higher in the group who did the visualization. Activated T-cells
are known to induce the death of tumour cells and also to inhibit the growth
of tumours.
Furthermore, as with other studies, the vividness of the imagery seemed
to have an effect. Women who reported vivid imagery had significantly
higher levels of natural killer (NK) cell activity during and after treatment
and again at followup. NK cells are a critical component of the immune
system and are known to be naturally cytotoxic (as before, they kill cancer
cells).
Indeed, part of these women’ s immune systems showed high levels of
cytotoxicity even after the fourth (and final) chemotherapy cycle. The
researchers said that ‘relaxation training and guided imagery beneficially
altered putative anticancer host defences during and after multimodality
therapy’.
Another study , of women with breast cancer who were under going
surgery, used the same kind of visualization of the immune system
destroying cancer cells. It involved 28 women with stage 0, 1 or 2 breast
cancer , and found the same kind of elevating effect on natural killer (NK)
cell cytotoxicity .
The women’ s visualization sessions varied in frequency , ranging from
twice a week to twice a day over a period of four weeks. Meas urements of
NK cell activity  were taken before surgery and again four weeks after it. As
with the other studies, the women who did the visualizations  had much
higher NK cell activity than those who did not.
In an earlier (1988) US study , conducted at Geor ge Washington
University hospital and lasting a whole year, increases in several
components of the immune system were also measured in patients with
metastatic cancer who visualized their immune system destroying cancer
cells.
Monthly blood samples were taken regularly throughout the year and
showed positive changes in NK cell activity , the responsiveness of
lymphocytes, increased immunoglobulins (as in the Achte rberg study
described in the last chapter), and increased Interleukin-2 secretion.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a natural anticancer substance in the body that helps
activate white blood cells. Again, visualization was having a positive
impact on the immune system.
Non-Immune System Targeted Imagery
Some studies have shown that relaxation imagery , where imagery is of
pleasant, relaxing images and scenes, also benefits cancer patients. In part,
this is likely because relaxatio n reduces stress and therefore helps the
immune system work more optimally .
A rando mized controlled study of 208 patients, led by Andreas
Charalambous of the Cyprus University of Technology , used this kind of
guided imagery in an attempt to manage cluster symptoms in people
under going chemotherapy or radiotherapy for breast or prostate cancer .
Cluster symptoms are defined as two or more related symptom s that occur
at the same time, and they’re quite common side effects in patients
under going cancer treatment.
Approximately half the patients in the study did the guided imagery and
relaxation sessio ns and were compared with a control group who didn’ t
visualize. Prior to the study , the patients were asked what they might like to
visualize and most chose relaxi ng images such as floating on a cloud or a
relaxing beach scene.
Imagery sessions were super vised once weekly and unsupervised
(patients did them on their own) daily for four weeks. After four weekly
sessions of guided imagery and progressive muscle relaxation, pain levels
dropped in the intervention group, yet increased in the control group, who
didn’ t receive the imagery training. The imagery group also experienced a
reduction in fatigue, anxiety and nausea, retching and vomiting, and
depression, as well as in levels of the stress hormone cortisol. Overall
quality of life increased in the imagery group but decreased in the control
group.
In another study of 65 breast cancer patients under going chemotherapy ,
guided imagery and relaxation training was given to 32 patients in addition
to their chemotherapy , while another 33 patients received chemotherapy
alone. Both groups also received chemotherapy self-care instructions.
Imagery and relaxation was conducted prior to chemotherapy and then
for the following seven days for 20 minutes each time. At the end of the
seven days, the patients who did the imagery and relaxation sessions
experienced significantly less insomnia, pain, anxiety and depression and
numbness in physical symptom s (typical side effects) than the group who
didn’ t receive the imagery and relaxation.
I’ve learned of this kind of effect from a large number of people whom I
come across in my work. I’ve taught the mind–body connection and
imagery in a number of chari table cancer centres where people going
through cancer treatments (chemotherapy , radiotherapy or surgery) also
attend to receive some complementary and alternative therapie s. Time and
time again, people share stories of how they used visualizati on and had
much-reduced side ef fects (you can read some of these later in the book).
Visualization for  Other  Medical Conditions
Research into the use of visualization shows that it can be applied to a wide
variety of medical conditions. I’ve summarized some of this research
below .
Weaning from mechanical ventilation
A 2015 US study demonstrated the benefits of using guided imagery to help
patients being weaned from mechanical ventilation (weaning is the gradual
reduction in the use of a ventilator to assist breathing). In helping patients to
breathe, mechanical ventilation thus helps oxygenate tissues and eliminate
carbon dioxide. It’s a vital, and expensive, treatment and, as of 2015 (when
the study was published), it cost an estimated $27 billion a year – 12 per
cent of total hospital costs in the USA.
The study invol ved 42 patients – 21 from each of two hosp itals. The
patients in one of the hospitals received guided imagery sessions that
focused on relaxation, while those in the other hospital didn’ t practise
imagery , to serve as a comparison.
The imagery patients received two sessions for 60 minutes at a time,
during weaning trials, two days apart, and the imagery was greatly
successful. Oxygen saturation levels significantly improved during the
second imagery session, compared with the group who didn’ t practise
imagery . Imagery patients were  also much calmer and their heart rate and
respiratory rate were much lower than they were in the comparison group.
The imagery group also require d fewer sedatives and analgesics to manage
pain.
Overall, the imagery group required an average of 4.88 fewer days of
mechanical ventilation and an average reduction in hospital stay of 1.4
days. If the study was reflective of a larger population trend, this reduction
in hospital stay, amounting to 6.7 per cent fewer days, could save the
US$1.8 billion a year in hospital costs – from an entirely free therapy: the
directed use of a patient’ s mind.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Medics at Tai Po Hospital in Hong Kong used guided imagery relaxation to
treat patients with COPD. Twenty-six patients were involved in the study .
Thirteen of them had six sessions of guided imagery while the other 13 just
rested during these times. At the end of the study , there was an increase in
oxygen saturation in the blood of the group who did guided imagery .
Asthma
Visualization has also been successfully used to help asthma sufferers
breathe more easily . In an Alaskan study involving 70 asthma patients,
participants either did what the researchers called ‘biologically targeted
imagery’, where  they imagined reduced bronchospasm and inflammation,
or they simply received educa tion in the management of asthma, as a
comparison group.
After six weeks of twice-weekly two-hour sessions, both visualization
and educ ation had substantially improved the symptoms of asthma; but the
greatest improvement was with the patients who’d used visualization.
Total knee replacement
The third most performed surgery in the USA  is total knee replacement.
One study involved 58 patients,  half of whom did guided imagery sessions
daily for two weeks before their sur gery and for three weeks after sur gery.
For this, they listened to a CD that guided them in visualizing their knee
being strong and able to easily support their weight. It also guided them in
visualizing them selves walking , turning a pain dial down and imagining
their medication  doing what it needed to do. In addition, affirmations were
included to help the patients feel positive, to be motivated to do their
physical therapy exercises and to have belief in their recovery .
At both three weeks and six months post-sur gery, the guided imagery
group had improved walking velocity , lower pain scores and lower stress
hormone levels than the group who didn’ t do the imagery sessions.
Osteoarthritis
A 2006 study conducted at Purdue University School of Nursing in the
USA  showed that guided imagery benefited older women with
osteoarthritis. Twenty-eight women were involved in the study: half used
guided imagery  for 12 weeks  and half were in the control group for
comparison. The study found that the women who used guided imagery had
significantly improved quality of life than those who didn’ t.
Interstitial cystitis
A 2008 US study at William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Michigan,
used guided imagery in the treatment of interstitial cystitis. Twice daily for
eight weeks, 15 women used images focusing on healing the bladder ,
relaxing the pelvic-floor muscle s and quietening the nerves involved in the
condition for 25 minutes at a time. Fifteen women in a control group rested
during these times. The women who used guided imagery had significantly
reduced symptoms and pain than those who didn’ t.
Wound healing after gallbladder removal
Guided imagery  even affects wound healing, as was shown by a 2007 study
at Southeastern  Louisiana University School of Nursing in the USA
involving 24 patients under going surgery to remove their gallbladder . The
study found that the guided imagery not only reduced levels of anxiety and
stress hormones, but also that those who used it had much lower levels of
surgical wound erythema – redness around a wound that’s usually
associated with infection or inflammation. In effect, guided imagery
speeded up the healing of the patients’  wounds.
Visualization for  Weight Loss
A friend of mine told me that one of her weight-loss strategies is to drink
water before she eats. The wate r, she says, suppresses her appetite a little
and she then finds that she eats less. Researchers at Carne gie Mellon
University in the USA  found a novel way of using visualizatio n to affect a
person’ s appetite.
In a study , 51 people were asked to imagine eating either three or 30 units
of a particular food; the food used was M&M’ s sweets. One set of
volunteers had to imagine eating three M&M’ s, and they also had to
imagine putting 30 coins into a laundry machine. Another set of volunteers
had to do it the other way around: they imagined eating 30 M&M’ s but
were to imagine placing only three coins into the machine. A third set of
volunteers just imagined placing 33 coins into the machine.
You might wond er about the relevance of imagining putting coins into a
machine. The reason was becau se the muscles used in doing so are similar
to those  used in lifting food into our mouth, and it was important that the
volunteers all imagined the same number of hand movements.
After a distracting activity , the volunteers were invited to eat some
M&M’ s from a bowl in preparat ion for what they were told was going to be
a ‘taste  test’. But it wasn’ t really a taste test: it was so that the
experimenters could secretly record how many M&M’ s they ate.
Amazingly , the researchers found that those who’d imagined  eating the
most M&M’ s (30) ate far fewer from the bowl than the other two groups.
The conclusion of the study was that imagining eating the M&M’ s
suppressed the appetite to eat more of them, just as if the volunteers had
physically eaten  them. It’s like the brain was saying, ‘OK, I’ve had enough
M&M’ s now. I’m full,’  even though the person hadn’ t actually eaten
anything at all.
The researchers did a similar experiment with cubes of cheese and found
the same thing. However , imagining eating M&M’ s only reduced the
volunteers’  appetite for M&M’ s, not for cubes of cheese, and vice versa.
This is known as habituation. As we eat more of a particular food, after a
point our appetite for that food reduces, otherwise we’d keep on eating it. It
doesn’ t necessarily reduce our desire for other foods. We all know what it’s
like to be completely full after eating a meal, but somehow we have space
for pudding. But importantly , habituation seemed to happen just by
imagining eating.
As we’ve learned so far in the book, there’ s a thin line between  real and
imaginary as far as the brain is concerned. And as far as the Carnegie
Mellon University study was concerned, Carey Morewedge, who led it,
said, ‘The difference between imagining and experiencing may be smaller
than previously assumed.’
It seems that if a person actually imagines the full process of eating – i.e.
repetitively chew ing and swallowing the food – it produces a similar effect
in the brain to actually eating the food. It might be that we can imagine
eating a meal, bite for bite, before we eat and then find that we don’t feel
like eating as much; therefore, weight loss is a natural side ef fect.
However , the research is still in its infancy and there’ s no data yet on
whether imagini ng eating affects any of the body’ s other systems, like blood
sugar , for instance, or even whether it causes us to eat so much less that the
body lacks the nutrition it needs . But it’s interesting to see the same kind of
effect in that the brain  often doesn’ t make much of a distinction between
real and imaginary . It seems it’s true for movement, immune function and
even eating. It’s likely to be a much wider phenomenon that further research
will reveal in the future.
Visualizing Drugs Working
Instead of imagining the workings of their immune system or visualizing a
state of repair taking place, or illness moving towards wellness, as I
mentioned above, many people who are taking medication visualize their
medication work ing: from chemo drugs to pain-killing medication and even
antibiotics.
Some people derive great benefit from creating a mini-ritual around
taking their medicines. It’s much  better , they believe, than popping a couple
of pills in a hurry , where they just take a gulp of water and rush on with
whatever else they’re doing. Some people take medication just before or
during a meditation, or they say a prayer as part of their ‘medication ritual’.
Many people I’ve spoken with who are under going treatment for cancer
visualize their chemotherapy drugs acting like Pac-Men or piran ha fish and
eating the cancer cells or tumou r(s). They imagine cancer cells or tumours
then becoming smaller and smaller until they vanish. People under going
radiotherapy do something similar: imagining the radiation as like bolts of
lightning gradually burning the cancer cells or tumour away . People on
antibiotics sometimes imagine the antibiotics as little vacuum cleaners
clearing an infection away .
Given that we’v e learned how selectively the mind can affect the body –
from placebo effects to visualizing different parts of the body and even to
selective changes in immune function – the key is to be as clear and specific
as you can.
Mental representation for illness and disease can be a little different from
rehabilitation and sports in that, unlike in those, the exact physiology
visualized doesn’ t seem to be as important as having a representation that
feels right to the person visualizing. A symbol does as well as an accurate
picture, so long as it feels right (that is, it makes sense to the individual
doing it). In other words, imagining an immune cell as a Pac-Man or
piranha fish is just as good as imagining how it actually looks , so long as
what you imagine makes sense to you and represents what you are
intending.
Mental Repr esentation
In the cancer studies above where imagery vividness was assessed, the
positive impact on the immune system and on quality of life was correlated
with the clarity of imagery . The same kind of thing was shown with
visualization for sports. In each case, the impact of visualizatio n seemed to
be stronger when there was a clear mental representation. As indicated
earlier , mental representation – the clarity of our images – also affects
success in healing. It can even af fect our ability to relax.
In a 2006 study , scientists from the Department of Health Prom otion and
Human Behaviour at Kyoto University in Japan measured levels of stress
hormones (salivary cortisol) and mood in 148 people who received two
guided imagery relaxation sessions.
First, the study found that salivary cortisol levels were much less after the
first and second sessions. The scientists wrote that, ‘Unpleasant
information, a cause of mental stress, is replaced by a comfortable image,
and this replacement affects a person’ s salivary cortisol level.’  Second,
those who had the more vivid images had the biggest reduction in salivary
cortisol levels.
Sometimes, relaxation imagery can be better than targeted visualization,
but clarity helps, regardless. The type of visualization a person chooses
really depends on the condition and also on the person, in terms of whether
they’re more interested in relax ation or distraction, or even find an active
visualization enjoyable or stressful.
This could be seen in a guided imagery study used to treat fibromyalgia
pain. Publishing in the Journal of Psychiatric Resear ch in 2002, scienti sts
at the Norwegian  University of Science and Technology compared ‘pleasant
imagery’  (which used pleasant images to distract the patients from their
pain) with ‘attention imagery’  (visualizing the ‘active work ings of the
internal pain-control systems’).
Fifty-five wome n were involved in the study and their level of pain was
monitored every day for a period of four weeks. The pain level in the
‘pleasant image ry’ group was significantly reduced, while it wasn’ t in the
‘attention imagery’  group.
There’ s no question that visuali zation has biological effects. It selectively
impacts the immune system and has been shown to bring about positive
effects on a number of medical conditions, including cancer . Previous
chapters of this book have also shown that placing attention on a region of
the body  impacts that part of the body , as well as the region of the brain
connected with it.
Don’ t be concerned, however , if you think you’re not a good visualizer .
For some people, visualization vividness can be more about the clarity of an
idea rather than the formation of a physical image in their mind’ s eye.
Understanding how the immun e system works and clearly and succinctly
intending it to work for you (or even asking it to work for you, as some
people do), without actually ‘seeing’  anything, might be just as effective as
having a mental image in the mind’ s eye.
Regardless, with practice, visualization gets easier . I know that from
experience. The parts of your brain involved in visualizing will expand with
practice and your ability will improve. It’s just like getting bette r at a sport.
Few people can run a 10k on a first attempt; most will barely manage
around the block. But with some training – trying out various shorter
distances on a regular basis – it’s not long before the average person can run
a 10k. It’ s the same with learning to do visualization.
So, does visualization work exclusively through its impact upon the
immune system?  In many of the studies mentioned above, people targeted
their visualizations towards their immune system, and in some of these they
even imagined their immune system destroying cancer cells. But in other
studies, visualization was more about visualizing the movement of muscles,
or the relief of symptoms, or even the repair of a body system. And whether
a person  believes in visualization or not might even introduce  placebo or
nocebo ef fects.
Clearly , visualization works in different ways depending on the nature of
the visualizatio n used. The next chapter briefly explores some of the
different ways that visualization might be having its ef fects.
Chapter 10
How Visualization Works
‘I always want to know how things work. Had
I been Aladdin, I am certain that just after one
wish or two, I’d have taken that old lamp apart
to see if I could make another , better lamp.’
WALTER  P. CHRYSLER
Although we’v e learned a lot so far about some of the effects of
visualization, it can produce benefits in more than one way. It seems to me
that there are several different ‘pathways’  through which visualization
works, and we’ll now look at six of these:
1. A person’ s practice impacts their immune system.
2. Direct effects via the nervous system (which causes neuroplasticity
in the brain).
3. Direct ef fects via neuropeptides.
4. A person feels empowered rather than hopeless.
5. The impact of positive belief (facilitated by the placebo
‘mechanism’).
6. The focusing of a person’ s willpower .
The Six Visualization Pathways
For any person, all six pathways might be working at the same time, or one
or two may dominate. Here’ s a brief explanation of how each of the
pathways works:
1. A person’ s practice impacts their immune system
As I explained earlier , visualization seems to impact the immune system,
and in a selecti ve (targeted) way. People visualizing their immune cells
multiplying or their immune system destroying invading pathogens or
cancer cells tend to have increas ed immune function. Thus, visualization of
the immune system might assist in the healing and recovery  of a large
number of medical conditions.
In addition, whether a person visualizes the action of the immune system
or not, if there’ s a positive effect on health, it may be that the immune
system has been  stimulated in some way as a direct or indirect consequence
of the visualization.
2. Direct ef fects via the nervous system
When a person repeatedly visualizes something, it creates physi cal changes
in the brain through neuroplasticity . For rehabilitation from a stroke or
improving performance at a sport, this is accompanied by a physical change
in the body , particularly in the region that a person’ s attention is focused
upon, but also in other systems of the body that are relevant to the change.
In effect, there’ s a cumulative effect of a person’ s consistent focus, just as
muscles grow cumulatively stronger as we exercise them. It’s likely that
this will increase blood flow to an area visualized, which  will carry
nutrients, growth factors and immune cells to the area as required.
3. Direct ef fects via neuropeptides
Just as feelings of stress produ ce stress hormones, so some mental and
emotional states produce different hormones, or neuropeptides.
Neuropeptides are substances (peptides , like small proteins or hormones)
that play roles in the body as well as in the brain, hence neuropeptides.
As an example, love, kindness, affection, compassion and emotional
warmth produce  oxytocin, a neuropeptide that, as well as acting in the
brain, also has physical effects throughout the body . Oxytocin receptors are
found in multiple locations throughout the body , including the heart and
arteries. Using these, oxytocin impacts the arteries, lowering blood
pressure, as well as having roles in wound healing. It also impacts the gut
and plays a role in digestion.
A person whose visualizations are characterized by these warm, positive
emotions is likely to produce oxytocin and thus have beneficial effects
throughout these systems. Othe r mental and emotional states may produce
neuropeptides that bring about other specific beneficial ef fects in the body .
4. A person feels empowered rather than hopeless
It’s all too easy to feel hopeless when we’re sick or injured, especially if the
illness or injury is physically or emotionally debilitating. I often hear people
say that understanding the mind–body connection gives them a sense of
empowerment: that using their mind is something they can do to assist in
the process of moving towards wellness.
It may be that a sense of empowerment produces an as-yet-unidentified
healing effect. At the very least,  it can reduce stress and give birth to hope.
Furthermore, a reduction in stress helps the immune system work more
optimally .
5. The impact of positive belief
As we learned earlier in the book, expectation and belief have direct
physical effects. Although sometimes dismissed as something that only
affects symptoms of illness, research into the placebo effect is revealing that
the ef fects of expectation or belief are much broader than we first realized.
Belief creates chemical change s in the brain and throughout the body ,
impacting on many more system s than we initially thought. It may be that
some of these effects have a direct bearing on the course of a person’ s
condition, accelerating the move towards wellness.
Faith in a higher power might also bring about effects in this way, or it
might produce a calming, accepting effect, which might reduce stress and
elevate the immune system in some way .
6. The focusing of a person’ s willpower
I don’t think we should ever underestimate the power of a person’s will to
live. Will to live is a determinat ion to survive and is often characterized by
hope and a positive expectation of the future.
Will to live can impact a person in many ways, not just in their
psychological state. But it can reduce stress and fear, and may also
stimulate a person to make necessary , sometimes subtle, but significant
changes required for their health. Visualization can impact on a person’ s
will to live by aiding their focus on health.
Overall, commo n to all of these pathways is repetition: I believe that
repetition of a visualization process refines brain circuits. In other words,
repetition causes  neuroplasticity . I believe that at some point, given that in
some ways the brain doesn’ t distingu ish real from imaginary , the brain will
‘wire in’ a picture of wellness.  In time, perhaps the brain circuits of this
imagined wellness become more dominant than those related to the
presence of illness.
At that point, perhaps some kind of tipping point occurs where the
internal biochemistry of the body tips in the direction of wellness, resulting
in an actual physical move towards wellness. This is just a hypothesis that
I’ve considered  as a possible explanation for some of the effects of
visualization. In time, research may confirm it, expand upon it, refine it, or
render it as incorrect.
Natural recovery
There’ s one other contributing factor that I didn’ t include in the above list,
simply because it’s not an inten tional effect. People often just naturally get
better .
It can be the natural course of their condition or injury , or due to some
effect of their natural constitution or their genes. Or perhaps through some
change in their dietary habits or environment – changes to a person’ s diet or
environment might unknowingly remove stress or a toxin that has been
impacting on their health, and this might lead to a recovery .
What If Visualization Doesn’t Work?
There will be times when visualization seems to have helped a person and
other times when it doesn’ t. In the times when it doesn’ t seem to have
helped, it needn’ t mean that it had no effects: perhaps there are other
contributing factors to the medical condition that are currently playing a
greater role.
We can think of it in a similar fashion to making a change in diet, stress,
exercise habits,  or some other lifestyle habits (smoking or alcohol
consumption, for example). Mostly , positive changes will have positive
effects but sometimes they’re not enough.
We mustn’ t lose hope when visualization doesn’ t seem to be having an
effect. And please remember that visualization is not something we do
instead  of heeding medical advice, but in addition  to medical advice.
Many people have told me that they had fewer side effects of
chemotherapy drugs when they visualized their drugs like piranha fish
eating cancer cells or tumours, as I mentioned earlier . Earlier we also
learned of a reduction in side effects through visualization in randomized
controlled trials.  Sometimes, the main role of visualization can simply be in
damage limitation or providing some mental or emotional comfort.
I believe that the mind is always having an effect, even when we don’t
notice. Sometimes, rather than taking an active role with visualization, a
better use of the mind is in reducing stress and getting an emoti onal weight
off our chest, which is discussed in the next chapter .
Chapter 11
To Stress, or Not to Stress
‘Do not dwell in the past, do not
dream of the futur e, concentrate the
mind on the pr esent moment.’
BUDDHA
I feel that it’s very important to devote a whole chapter of this book to stress
because it can have such a negative impact upon health.
Stress has been linked with a large number of conditions. For instance,
long-term stress  has been linked with anxiety and depression, sleeping
problems, hypertension, heart disease, stroke, cancer , ulcers, colds and flu,
rheumatoid arthr itis, obesity and even the rate of ageing. It can also depress
the immune system and therefore lower our ability to fight infection.
That was the conclusion of a 2004 meta-analysis of 293 scientif ic studies
examining the links between stress and the immune system. It showed that
stress weakened  the immune system. Therefore, if we can reduce stress in
our lives, we can enjoy healthier lives. And studies have show n that if we
reduce stress, we recover faster from illness and disease.
A 2003 study conducted by scientists at the University of Auckland in
New Zealand investigated how stress affected the rate of healing. It
involved 36 patients who’d under gone an operation. The scientists took
samples of wound fluid after the operation and found that the chemical
composition of the fluid was different if the person was feeling calm or
stressed before the operation. The fluid in the stressed patients had fewer
substances necessary to heal the wound.
Stress even affects how well medicines work for us. Scientists at the
UCLA  AIDS Institute in the USA, publishing in Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences  in 2001 , reported that stress not only enabled
HIV to spread faster in infected  persons, but that it prevented antiretroviral
drugs from doing their job properly .
The scientists measured the viral load and CD4 cell count of 13 HIV-
positive men who’d never previously taken combination antiretroviral
drugs. They also measured their blood pressure, skin moisture and heart rate
at rest. The patients were then given a powerful regime of antiretroviral
drugs. Over the next three to 11 months, their viral load and CD4 cell count
were measured and compared with before they took the drugs. The results
were dramatic.
The higher the patient’ s stress  level, the less they responded to the
antiretroviral drugs. The average reduction in viral load was more than 40
times for men with low stress, but less than 10 times for men with high
stress. The drugs worked four times better for the patients who were calm
than for those who were most stressed. The authors wrote that, ‘Our
findings sugges t that the nervous system has a direct effect on viral
replication.’
In anoth er paper , published in 2003 in Biological Psychiatry , the same
scientists descri bed the results of an 18-month study involving 54 HIV-
positive men. They measured each person’ s ‘stress personali ty’ – the way
they reacted to stressful events – and found that ‘shy people with high stress
responses posses s higher viral loads’. Instead of lowering viral loads, which
the drugs were supposed to do, this study showed that the virus replicated
between 10 and 100 times faste r in the shy people with high stress than it
did in the other patients.
Faced with stressful situations, some people tell others how they feel,
express their emotions and explain the challenges they’re facing. Doing this
can really help them to deal with things because it means they have
someone to talk to, and being honest with them acts as a relea se valve for
their emotions. A problem shared is a problem halved, as they say. But
others suppress how they feel and don’t tell anyone because they’re afraid
that people will think they’re not good enough, or because they’re afraid of
people’ s reactions and think they might judge them.
Much research has found a link between suppressed negative  emotion
and disease. In my first book, It’s the Thought That Counts , I described
several studies showing a link with cancer . One study found that tumours
were thickest in people with ‘Non-verbal Type C’ personality . This type of
person was described as being ‘cooperative, unassertive, and suppressing
negative emotion’, which is very similar to the HIV studies above showing
that shy people with high stress responses had higher viral loads.
These research studies tell us that it helps to share our problems with
people. Storing up our worries and emotional pain inside does us little
good. The growth of suppressed  negative emotion is like a balloon inflating
in the psyche. As the balloon gets bigger , so symptoms of disease can
express themsel ves throughout the body . We need to find a release valve
where we regularly release a little of the air from our stress balloons.
Let It Out
Some studies have shown that simply writing down how you feel can
release the air from the stress balloon.
In the 1980s, University of Texas psychologist James Pennebaker had
half of the students in one of his classes write for 15 minutes on four
consecutive days about their deepest thoughts and feelings about traumatic
experiences in their lives. The other half of the students was asked to simply
write about everyday things. At the end of the year, the two groups were
compared and it was found that the students who’d written about their life
experiences were the healthier of the two.
In a similar study , published in 1995 in the Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology , medic al students either wrote for four days about
traumatic exper iences they’d had or wrote about everyday things. They
received a vaccination for hepat itis B on the fifth day. When blood samples
were taken after four and six months, the group who’d written  about their
traumatic experi ences had much higher antibody levels against hepatitis B
than the students who’d just written about everyday things.
And a 2004 study reported in the journal Psychosomatic Medicine
showed that writing about emotional topics even improved the health of
HIV patients. The study involved 37 patients, around half of whom wrote
for 30 minutes per day for four consecutive days, and found that those who
wrote about their emotional experiences had significantly lowe r viral loads
and higher CD4 cell counts.
In a 2007 paper published in the journal Brain, Behaviour and Immunity ,
scientists from Ohio State Univ ersity in the USA  showed that emotional
support sessions  that were desig ned to reduce stress improved the health of
cancer patients. The study involved 227 breast cancer patients;
approximately half of them had the sessions. At the end of the one-year
study , the women who’d gone through the sessions were healthier than
those who hadn ’t, according to tests on their heart, liver, kidneys, immune
system and even emotional health.
Just as in the previous studies mentioned in this chapter , these four
studies also show that talking about our worries and stresses can improve
our health. And when we do share how we feel with another person it also
gives them the opportunity to help, which is a deep desire that we as a
species crave – the need to be needed. So, not only are we doing  ourselves a
favour by expressing how we feel, we’re doing others a favour too.
Relax with Meditation
As well as talking with people, a well-known antidote to stress is
meditation. With regular practice, meditation can have a dram atic impact
upon stress levels. Regular meditation calms the mind and makes it much
easier to face life’ s challenges.
That was one of the first things I noticed when I first learned meditation
– some of the things that bothered me at the time and caused me stress, no
longer had the same impact. And since most meditation techniques focus
upon breathing, through medita tion practice I was able to induce a state of
relaxation in a challenging situation just by taking conscious breaths, which
is breathing on purpose.
So, when I was challenged in a way that might have previous ly caused
me stress, I would take a breath and pay it my full attention. Then I would
take a few more . Doing this made me feel differently about the situation. I
no longe r reacte d. Instead, I chose what I would say and do. I felt much
more in control.
This was my personal experienc e, but it’s an experience shared by many
millions of people who meditat e daily . If you want to meditate and don’t
know how, you could enrol in a good class, or read a book on it, or just sit
for 10 minutes and pay attention to your breathing. After all, the simplest
form of meditation is to simply become mindful of the fact that you’re
breathing. There fore, listen to the sound of your breathing and the feeling as
the breath goes through your nostrils. It’s a very simple meditation
technique but very ef fective.
Such is the recognized power of meditation that it’s now frequently used
in clinic al pract ice to help with a variety of illnesses and diseases where
stress is an aggravating factor. Many studies of meditation involve
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), which is based upon the
Buddhist technique of sitting quietly and being mindful of your breathing
and any thought s that arise. When thoughts arise, we just let them dissolve.
MBSR also usually involves gentle yoga sessions.
A 2007 study looked at the effects of an MBSR programme on the health
of early-stage breast and prosta te cancer patients. It involved 49 patients
with breast cancer and 10 with prostate cancer . Scientists measured their
mood, symptoms of stress, cortisol (stress hormone) levels, immune cell
counts, blood pressure and heart rate before the study , after six months, and
again after 12 months. They found a large improvement in stress symptoms,
a reduction in blood pressure, decreased levels of cortisol and an increase in
immune cell counts.
A 2007 study conducted at the Department of Emer gency Medicine at
Thomas Jefferso n University in the USA  showed that MBSR could be used
to contr ol glucose levels in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. After
practising MBSR, patients had lower glycosylated haemoglo bin (hA1c)
levels (0.48 per cent lower on average) and also had lower blood pressure,
less anxiety , depression and psychological distress than patients who didn’ t
use it.
Meditation has even been evaluated on healthy people. A 2007 US study
published by scientists at Duke  University Medical Center involved 200
healthy adults who learned a simple mantra-based meditation technique
over four small one-hour group  sessions and then practised it during the
study for 15–20  minutes twice a day. The study showed that there were
significant improvements in mood as well as reduced stress and anxiety .
The scientists also found that more frequent practice produced better
outcomes. More meditation was better than less, or none at all.
A power ful 2008 Harvard study showed that meditation affects us at the
genetic level. It sheds some light on why it has such a profo und impact
upon health. In the study , 20 volunteers were trained in various Relaxation
Response techn iques for eight weeks. The Relaxation Response is the
physiological response to techniques including meditation, yoga, repetitive
prayer , tai chi, qigong, breathing exercises and guided imagery .
Genetic analysis of volunteers’  blood found that 1,561 genes were
expressed differently (switched on or off) after the training. Longer -term
practitioners of the techniques were found to have 2,209 genes  differently
affected. Specifically , after eight week of training, 874 genes were
upregulated (dimmer switch turned up) and 687 were downregulated
(dimmer switched turned down) . The overall change to on-ness or off-ness
of genes  was producing a net positive change in the body with regards to
stress, and even ageing.
So, meditation benefits us after only a little practice. The above studies
show the health  benefits even at the genetic level, but we notice almost
immediate benefits to our state of mind.
In 2002, I was invited by the Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University
on a one-week-long meditation  retreat in the mountains of Rajasthan in
India. Days typically involved a 45-minute meditation at around 6 a.m.,
followed by a half-hour silent walk. After breakfast the delegates attended a
few classes. Some free time in the afternoon was followed by another 45-
minute meditation and yet another in the evening after dinner .
When I returned home I noticed  that my mind had never been so still. I
couldn’ t help noticing that there  was an absence of thoughts buzzing around
in my head. It was a strange sensation at the time, feeling just emptiness in
my mind, although it was a good sensation. I felt great physically , mentally ,
emotionally and spiritually . I felt motivated to make some lifestyle changes
that easily became permanent. And this highly peaceful mind stayed with
me for about a month before I gradually drifted back into my daily
thoughts, although I’ve never rescinded the lifestyle changes.
In the real world
We all know that life happens. Often, we can’t control what happens, but
we certainly have more control over how we respond to what happens and
the freedom to choose our attitude.
Stress can creep  up on us. I’ve worked in a corporate environment where
I ‘had’ to get certain things done. But did I really ‘have’  to? Would the
world have ended if I hadn’ t? Sometimes we need to stop the habit of our
busyness and ask ourselves what’ s more important – the job or our health.
Is a job worth a life?
Sometimes it’s only when we have a health scare caused by stress that we
sit up and take notice and suddenly realize that we have a choic e in how we
handle situations . Many people have re-evaluated their priorities  in life after
suffering a heart attack or stroke and have emer ged with a completely
different attitude: ‘Nothing is more important than my health.’
Handling stress is something that can be learned. The skill lies in making
a shift in what we think is impor tant, in our priorities. And, as we’ve seen in
this chapter, sharing our worries with people helps and meditation helps.
Having a positive attitude also helps.
We should also recognize that it’s not so much the events of our lives that
cause stress, but our attitudes towards them. Recognizing that the stress
comes from our own perception of a situation gives us a better ability to
control things, or ourselves. Because sometimes, stuff happens! How it
affects us is up to us, though!
We have the ability to see things differently in life. When we shift our
priorities – which is something  that we do in our own mind – we can
immediately reduce our stress levels.
And from  the space of having reduced stress in our lives we can begin to
heal. Sometimes, all we really need to do to heal is get out of the way – cut
down the stressful thoughts in our mind – and let the body’ s natural healing
systems do their work. When we use visualization to aid healing, it’s always
better when we have less stress.
In the next chapter , we’ll learn some of the best ways to visualize.
Chapter 12
How to Visualize
‘Imagination is everything. It is the pr eview
of life’ s coming attractions.’
ALBER T EINSTEIN
There are several ways to use visualization, some of which we’ve met
already . We can visualize parts  of the body moving. We can visualize a
pleasant scene that helps us relax, or visualize the immune system working,
or visualize drugs doing what they’re supposed to do, or simply imagine
illness changing  into wellness. The key to using visualization is to visualize
what you want to happen or visualize it as if it is happening.
For exam ple, in some of the research described earlier , people visualized
their immune system destroying  cancer cells. Some people also imagine a
tumour (or tumours) shrinking  until it (they) disappears completely . In
effect, they visualize a process of illness changing into wellness.
They do this frequently . Some visualize every day, some twice a day.
Some visualize a few times a week instead. Consistency seems to be
important; more so, perhaps, than how long a person visualizes each time.
As we learned earlier , you don’t need to be able to see in high definition
in your mind’ s eye. Some people think they can’t visualize, because they’re
comparing themselves against the seeming descriptions of other people’ s
visualizations. I like to substitut e the word visualize  for imagine  as it feels
less ‘visual’. We all imagine in our own way. More importan t than what
something looks like in our mind’s eye, or how clearly we see it, is that we
have a clear intent. Having a clear intent aids the visualization, or imagery ,
process.
You can even imagine cells, organs, components of the immune system,
or any parts of the body as characters with personalities. You can even
imagine yourself as a participant in a healing process, as if you’re a
miniature version of yourself – like a Mini-Me.
You don’t need to know exact ly what something looks like, although
getting an idea of it can help with your own mental clarity . The scientific
exactness of an image matters less than the clarity with which you have it in
your mind’ s eye.
Drawing things out first on paper often helps people in getting a clear
idea of what they will visualize.
The Seven Differ ent Kinds of Visualization
Over several years of speaking to people about the kinds of visualizations
they do, I’ve found they tend to fall into seven broad categories. These are
by no means the only types of visualization you can do, but I thought I’d
list them as guidelines that might help you to form your own visualizations.
To explain each type, I’ve shared a brief example. As you’ll see, although
I’ve categorized the visualizatio n types individually , many have a bit of two
or more of the categories in them.
1. Active change
This describes any visualization where you actively change something. It’s
a very broad-ranging strategy and is more of a ‘catch-all’  in that it describes
visualizations that don’ t necessarily fit into any of the other categories.
An example of an active change visualization would be visualizing the
shrinking of a cancer cell or tumour(s). In your mind’ s eye, you’re
imagining a tumour actively changing in its appearance, becoming smaller
and smaller and smaller until it’ s gone entirely .
With cancer, some people imagine the immune system taking central
stage here; others imagine drugs as piranha fish eating the cancer cells or
tumour(s). Other s imagine tumours melting as if they’re made of ice. Others
still imagine using sandpaper and grinding them to dust, collecting the dust
and disposing of it outside the body . In each case, they’re actively changing
the nature of the disease.
Some people use a similar strategy for inflammation. For instance,
people with arthritis sometimes imagine reducing inflammation and oiling a
joint, and then imagine the now-oiled joint moving freely .
2. Clean and polish
This type of visualization is where you might imagine cleaning or polishing
something. For example, a woman once shared with me that she’d
improved her kidney function by imagining cleaning kidney cells. She had
chronic kidney disease and a low-percentage kidney function.  She didn’ t
know exactly what a diseased cell looked like but pictured it as wrinkled
and grey .
Each day, she spent time clean ing diseased cells, restoring them in her
imagination to a healthy , bulbou s pink. As each cell was cleaned , she’d give
it a kiss and a gentle hug and tell it how grateful she was for the wonderful
job it does to keep her healthy . I met her a year or so later and she explained
that her doctor had recently confirmed that her kidney function  was in the
normal range again.
Some people use this kind of strategy to imagine cleaning their arteries.
Some imagine using a steam cleaner, and when the walls are washed, they
collect all the debris in bin bags and take them outside the body to be
disposed of.
People even use this strategy to imagine cleaning up infection s. As an
example, they might imagine an infection as like pepper sprinkled over an
infected area. Then they imagine vacuuming it all up, even imagining the
crackling sounds  a vacuum clean er sometimes makes as it picks up particles
of debris from a carpet.
A woman once told me how she’d greatly improved her eyesight by
imagining cleaning and polish ing the lenses of her eyes, as well as
massaging the muscles.
3. Intervene in a process
This kind of visualization tends to be used by people who unde rstand some
of the biological processes they’re visualizing. For example, people with
allergies or autoimmune conditions sometimes use this strategy .
An autoimmune condition is characterized by the immune system
attacking part of the body , perhaps perceiving it to be alien to the body .
Rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, diabetes (type 1), multiple sclerosis and
myasthenia gravis are examples of autoimmune conditions.
So, people visualize intervenin g in the process and changing what’ s
happening. They  imagine the immune system backing off, for example, and
even making friends with the area of the body affected. You can also see an
example of an autoimmune visualization in the A–Z of Visualizations in
Part II .
People with allergies do something similar , imagining their immune
system becoming less sensitive to an allergen. You can also see an example
of an aller gies visualization in the A–Z of Visualizations in Part II .
4. Speak to your cells
In this kind of visualization, people sometimes imagine they’ re having a
conversation with their cells in an injured or diseased part of the body . They
might ask the cells what they need, or if they require the person to make
any change in their life, like a change in diet or lifestyle, or if there’ s
something (or someone) they need to avoid, for example. Peop le often do
this kind of visualization as part of a meditation, so they first enter a relaxed
state before initiating the conversation.
5. Symbolic change
This kind of visualization is where a person makes a symbolic version of
what they want to visualize. It’s often used by people with non-physical
conditions in which they don’ t have anything physical to imagine.
As an example, I met a gentlem an years ago who’d suffered terribly with
depression. He decided to try visualization but didn’ t know what he should
visualize. He told me he had felt broken, in that his life had completely
fallen apart. He was once a successful professional, had been happily
married and lived in a nice house. Now , he was divorced, living alone in a
small apartment, had no job and no prospects and was taking  medication
every day. His life, and how he felt about himself, was now a faint shadow
of what it had once been.
He decided that he would visua lize turning brokenness into wholeness.
He imagined brokenness symb olically as a broken mirror , one that had
fallen on the ground and shattered. In his imagination, he swept up the
shards of the mirror and emptie d them into a cauldron. Then he lit a fire
under it and melted the shards until they were liquid, like liquid silver .
Then he imagined pouring the liquid silver into a brand-new mould. He
then blew on it to cool it and held up the now-whole mirror . He’d turned
brokenness into wholeness, and in so doing turned his own sense of
brokenness into wholeness. He fully recovered from depression.
6. Change in colour
This kind of visualization tends to form part of other visualizations, but
sometimes it can be a stand-alo ne visualization. Many people  like to use
colour in their visualizations as colour has symbolic meaning  for us. For
example, blue is a calming colour , while green often represents  nature and
growth. In the kidney cell exam ple above, the woman turned wrinkled grey
cells into healthy pink ones.
Some people see illness or disease as a dark or grey shadow and simply
imagine adding colour to the shadow until it has completely disappeared.
7. Immune boost
This is the type of visualization that we learned about earlier in the book,
where people imagine immune cells being made, multiplying or destroying
cancer cells. We can also imagine the immune system destroying invading
viruses or other dangerous pathogens. You can find an example of an
immune boost visualization in the A–Z of Visualizations in Part II .
From Illness to Wellness
The key to using  visualization is to remember that you’re turning a state of
illness (or injury) into wellness.
For example, in shrinking a tumour a person imagines the tumour getting
smaller and smaller and smaller . Illness is represented by the presence of
the tumour and wellness is represented by the fact that the tumour has gone.
If someone had a cut, illness would be the presence of the cut and wellness
would be the cut as healed. Illness is the starting point and wellness is the
end point.
Some people repeat illness to wellness every time they visualize. In other
words, they imagine the tumour(s) reducing to nothing or a cut healing
every time they visualize. With some people, as they begin each
visualization session, their starting point of illness moves a fraction closer
to wellness. So, in subsequent visualization sessions, they’d start with a
tumour that’s a little smaller than they imagined it to be in their previous
visualization.
Others prefer to just do ‘Illness to Wellness’  once or twice and then give
all their attention to wellness  from then on, where their visualization
consists mostly of seeing the injured or diseased region as healed. So, their
first one or two visualizations would consist of imagining  illness to
wellness, and then each one afterwards would simply imagine wellness.
Others do something in between. In their mind’ s eye, they do a little bit
of healing in each visualization session and thus the illness starting point for
each subsequen t visualization moves a little closer to the final state of
wellness, as if they’re gradually chipping away at something.
Some people worry that if they’re ‘seeing’  illness each time they
visualize then they’re reinforcing it. Depending on your particular
visualization, it might not matter, as you’re not picturing a static case of
illness but seeing it being spontaneously transformed, over and over again,
into wellness.
The most important thing is that the focus of a visualization is wellness –
that the end point is always wellness – and that visualization is done
consistently .
How Often Should I Visualize?
People vary in their practice. Typically , depending on the serio usness of a
condition, people spend anything from 10 minutes to an hour or more doing
mental practices, either in a single session or spread out in smaller chunks
throughout the day or week.
There’ s no exact rule – certainly  in terms of what science has studied, nor
even from the thousands of examples I’ve heard of over the past two
decades of studying the mind–body connection. People’ s use of
visualization varies quite considerably .
One thing is consistent, however , and that is that visualization itself
needs to be consistent. To me, this suggests that most forms of visualization
create some degree of neuroplasticity in the brain.
The following are some typica l timings and durations of visualization
used by people. Some people do one or two sessions of 10–20 minutes a
day, three to five times a week; others do a single session of anything from
five to 45 minutes. If you’re completely new to visualization, start with just
a couple of minutes and take it from there.
Some people prefer morning visualizations, while other s prefer
afternoons or evenings. Some people, instead of formal visualizations,
prefer to do a speeded-up version lasting 5–10 seconds, but they do it
whenever the thought of their condition pops into their mind – in a sense,
nipping the thought in the bud and replacing it with a positive  image and
feeling.
Ultimately , you can find your own preferred practice. The most important
thing is consistency . Being consistent with your practice is likely to be more
important than how long you visualize for. A tiny hammer can break a huge
boulder if it makes regular taps upon it. Similarly , if you want to be an
Olympic champion at a sport, going to the gym just once won’t get you
there. Going to the gym every day might. It’ s the same with visualization.
Getting the Most Out of Visualization
Here are some extra tips for your practice.
Record your  visualizations.  Some people find it helpful to record
their visualizations onto audio. You can write a visualization script
and read it yours elf or ask a friend to read it. You can even add some
gentle music if you find it helpful.
Draw or paint your  visualizations.  Some people find this very
helpful as it allows them to get clarity and focus on what they want to
imagine.
Ther e’s no single ‘corr ect’ visualization.  There’ s just what works
for you. If you’re imagining healing a part of the body by repairing
damaged cells, you can imagine  the cells in any way you want. Some
people might imagine healthy cells as clear blobs, with little dots at
the centre – like frogspawn. Others might see them as pink square or
circular jelly balls. Others might imagine them as rubbery bricks  on a
wall or like uncooked eggs after they’ve been cracked into a pan.
One person might see a damage d cell of an organ looking shrivelled
and dark, like a raisin or a prune. In their visualization, they might
imagine cleanin g it with a cloth or brush and watching it be restored
to its healthy shape, colour and texture. Then they move on to the
next cell and do the same again until all of the damaged cells are
restored to full health. Anothe r person might imagine nursing the
little prune back to full health. They might imagine taking care of it
and giving it magic medicine and seeing it regain its strength  and
colour .
Make it light.  To ensure that your scenes are free of stress, and so
that you have less fear of your condition, it can be good to
occasionally add some fun to them. For instance, in oiling an arthritic
joint, you might  squeeze the lubricating oil out of a can and imagine
the squeaking sound as it squirts out. You can exaggerate the sound if
you want.
Or imagine all the individual atoms of oil as little balls with smiley
faces. See them  shout ‘Whahhheeeeeeyyyyyy!’  as they slide out of
the oilcan funnel, as if they’re having a great fun time on a slide.
Adding bits of humour or lightheartedness to your scenes often
brings a smile to your face.
Do a victory dance. To make things  lighter , it can sometimes help to
do a silly dance, either real or imaginary , during or after a
visualization session. It can help move the brain away from a state of
worry or stress into a more positive state.
Be as creative as you want.  This is your imagination, so you can
imagine anything you want. You can imagine using a magic wand to
transform one thing into another . What’ s to stop you from using a
magic wand, like Harry Potter? You can summon an angel, if you
like, and ask for guidance. The only limits to the types of
visualizations are ones we impose ourselves. How you get to
‘wellness’  in your imagination is personal and is completely up to
you.
Be patie nt. Don’t become anxious if you’re not healed in a day or
two. Most things in life take a little time. Be patient and at the very
least you’ll spare yourself some stress.
Visualization resources
I’ve placed some free visualiz ation resources on my website, from the
basics of how the immune system works to some MP3 audios of guided
visualizations. I’ve also included an audio of a symbolic visuali zation that I
call Quantum Field Healing, which guides the listener to imagine a state of
illness from a subatomic perspective and then imagine changing ‘waves’  of
illness into ‘waves’  of wellness.
You can access these resources at www .drdavidhamilton.com/howtovisua
lize.
One of the things that we tend to do when we’re sick is focus upon the
disease, or how sick we are. By using visualization, we feel a sense of
power or hope and engage ourselves in the mental act of doing  something
about it. One of the great things about using visualization is that for periods
at a time the mind is focused on a positive outcome.
Chapter 13
The Power of Affirmations
‘One comes to believe whatever one
repeats to oneself sufficiently often, whether
the statement be true or false.’
ROBER T COLLIER
Affirmations are our self-talk. They’re simply affirmative statements about
something. They  can be useful in helping to maintain a focus on, or a desire
for, wellness.
The most well-known affirmation was created by French psychologist
Émile Coué, which he called an optimistic autosuggestion: ‘Every day, in
every way , I am getting better and better .’
We use autosuggestions, or affirmations, all the time without realizing.
Although for many of us they’r e negative affirmations in that they’re self-
talk statements made about something we find negative or stressful: ‘I’ll
never make it,’ ‘That’ s so annoying,’  and ‘This always happens  to me,’ are
common negative af firmations.
Creating positiv e affirmations can help relieve stress and even give birth
to hope.  They have to be realistic to an extent, though. For example, a
person with very low self-esteem may not gain much from saying ‘I love
myself ’ several times a day. That affirmation can work for some people, but
many will find saying it too much of a mountain to climb right now – a
little too much to hope for .
But we can create bridging affirmations, which are like baby steps in the
direction we want to move in. They’re statements of movement  in a positive
direction. ‘I’m gradually learning to love myself,’  is an example of a
bridging affirma tion that might be more helpful to someone with low self-
esteem.
We can use such affirmations to help focus on recovery . Here are some
examples of positive bridging af firmations that can be used for healing:
‘I’m in recovery .’
‘I’m getting better and better .’
‘I’m feeling better .’
‘I’m improving.’
‘My arm/leg movement is improving every day .’
‘The cancer cells are being destroyed.’
‘The tumour is shrinking/dissolving/melting.’
‘It’s going… going… gone.’
‘My immune system is becoming more ef ficient’
‘I can move freely and easily now .’
‘My blood pressure is returning to normal.’
‘My heart is getting healthier and healthier .’
‘My breathing is getting easier .’
With these kinds of affirmations, we’re not attempting to delude ourselves,
but instead simply making a statement of intent that helps to focus our
attention on the state of wellness we wish to create. It’s important,
therefore, that they’re positive. For instance:
‘I’m recovering fast’  is more positive than ‘My cold is going away .’
‘The tumour is dissolving’  is more positive than ‘My cancer is
becoming less severe.’
‘I’m in recover y’ is more positive than ‘I’m not feeling as bad
anymore.’
Affirmations can be useful together with, or independent of, visualization.
Affirmations as Visualization Commentary
You can use affirmations in your visualizations. Some people find it helpful
to give a verbal  commentary on what’ s happening, especially if they think
they’re not very good at visualizing, in which case the commentary helps
them to focus. For instance, during a visualization, as you, say, suck up
bacteria using an imaginary vacuum cleaner , you might affirm that, ‘I love
that all of the harmful bacteria are disappearing from my body .’
Or, while imagining radiotherap y ‘bullets’  burning off cancer cells, you
might affirm that, ‘I love that the light is burning away the cancer cells but
leaving everything else intact.’
And as another  example, let’s say that you were visualizing yourself
pouring some magical lubricatin g fluid into an arthritic joint. As you pick
up the container  of fluid and the rubber tube you’re going to use to pour the
fluid into the joint, you could acknowledge, ‘This fluid is a magical, 100
per cent ef ficient, everlasting lubricating fluid.’
And as you pour the fluid into the joint, point out to yourself that ‘The
fluid is seeping into the joint. The joint is looking totally free now.’ And as
you imagine the joint moving, point out that ‘The joint is moving freely and
easily now .’
So, basically , you commentate your way through your visualization. You
can add as much or as little commentary as you wish, or none at all. Many
people find it useful to add this kind of commentary if they’re  making an
audio recording of their visualizations to play as guided imagery .
So, affirmations  can be helpful, but they’re a personal choice. Some
people like to use them in the ways described above and other s don’t. Use
them if you feel they might help.

Chapter 14
True Stories of Successful Visualizations
This chapter contains some true stories from people around the world who
have used visualization as part of their journey to recovery from illness.
These stories were kindly sent to me by people in the spirit of wishing to
help others – in the hope that their use of visualization migh t give some
hope or insight, or inspire belief or confidence, in people going through
something similar . I’m deeply grateful to those who shared their stories.
As you’ll see, in most cases visualization was used alongside other
modes of treatment, just as with the visualization studies described earlier
in the book. None of the stories has been medically verified by myself: I’ve
received them in the spirit in which they were sent to me, in trust, and in the
hope that they may be of help to others in their lives.
I’ve grouped the stories together under the headings of each illness or
medical condit ion: cancer , Post-polio syndrome, psoriasis, ME/CFS,
cardiovascular conditions, inflammation, travel sickness, verrucas/plantar
warts, lupus, hay fever , weight loss and underactive thyroid.
Cancer
Sallie’ s story – Golden liquid love
December 2013  started with an enormous shock! Me… grade 3 breast
cancer?!!! And that was just the start of my huge emotional rollercoaster
ride. My life (and my health) were now suddenly being controlled by
others! What could I do to keep myself strong, heal, and get myself through
this?
The first step was to take back my power and learn to ‘let go’ – that was
lesson one! The next lessons were: to trust in myself and listen to my body;
to tap into my own healing power , knowledge and wisdom; to not listen to
others’  horror stories and their negativity surrounding the situation. I needed
to wrap  myself up with positi ve people and positive thoughts wherever
possible, for protection!
So, I tapped into my inner self and came up with some ideas.  I chose the
colour yellow as my ‘support’  colour (yellow flowers in the house, a yellow
purse, a yellow piece of material in my bag, etc., etc.) – all reminding me of
the warmth, power and colour of sunshine.
After my surgery, I envisaged myself clean, healthy and fast healing. To me,
the offending cells that had represented my old life had been  removed. I
was being cleansed and starting life afresh.
When I started my chemo, I envisaged the syringes emptying healing,
golden liquid love into my system. At each treatment, I gave healing love
and Reik i direct ly into the syringes as they lay prepped on the tray. At first
the hosp ital staff thought I was a little wacky , but I didn’ t care as it was
important to me and my healing. At each treatment visit, the staff couldn’ t
believe how well I looked and it wasn’ t long before they started to know my
routine and believe in it also, as they could see the evidence! I also
stipulated that the staff were only to use positive words around me; some
found that easie r than others, but I do believe the choice of words was so
important!
I learned  to love myself when I lost my hair. I was a bald adult baby at the
start of my new life! I wasn’ t to be governed by how my hair looked each
day. It was actually really libera ting and saved me a fortune in shampoo and
hair appointments!
After the chemo, it was time for the next stage of my treatment –
radiotherapy . I envisaged the radiotherapy as the warm sun healing me as I
lay there , not allowed to move, listening to the lovely music the staff played
for me.
My partner of only 18 months was so loving, supportive and strong; he
helped me put together a playlist of music that I loved to dance to, music
that brought a smile to my face and made me feel happy – that was
important. He made sure I ate properly and healthily , cooking everything
from scratch for me.
Every day I repeated positive mantras, like ‘Every day I get better and
better ,’ ‘My body is healthy , happy and healed,’  etc. I showed appreciation
and gratitude to everyone I met on my journey , for those who had helped
me and were there for me, for the treatments themselves and the science
behind them, and all the people who made my healing possible.
I took about 10 days off work in total during the eight months of treatment.
Work was a big distraction, but amazingly I was fit enough to work! I was
very lucky to have a good support network around me and I learned to ask
for help when I needed to. I found out who my friends were – that was a
tough insight!
I believe that the main healing points were my self-belief, positi ve thinking,
gratitude, suppo rt, visualization , homeopathy , hypnotherapy , Reiki, etc.,
alongside the traditional medicine.
Also, only having positive people and positive words spoken around me,
and of course, importantly , my loving, supportive partner , who is now my
husband!
Obviously , it wasn’ t always easy: at times my confidence was knocked, my
femininity was shoved out of the window from a great height and my still-
new relationship with my partner was challenged at times. But, you know
what? I’m grateful that I went through it all! One of the most amazing
things was that I hadn’ t had a sense of smell for 15 years. I couldn’ t breathe
through my nose, yet three days after my first chemo session  it all came
back! I smelled roast dinner and cut grass for the first time in years!
I’d grow n into a new me. I’d been a cygnet, and now I emer ged out the
other side as a beautiful swan, and I’m eternally grateful.
Lynn’ s story – Journey back to health
In December 2008, I was diagnosed with breast cancer , stage 3, and positive
nodes in axilla. In 2009, I had a mastectomy , reconstruction, chemotherapy
and radiotherapy .
In 2010, I was lucky enough to spend a lot of time at the Haven in London,
and met David Hamilton for the first time, attending his ‘How the mind can
heal the body’  workshop. At the time I was fascinated and inspired and
thought that if I’d heard him speak before my chemotherapy , I would have
had a totally different mind-set; as it was, I couldn’ t see past it being a
poison that my body found very hard to accept. Unsurprisingly , I’d had
pretty severe side ef fects.
In August 2012, I celebrated my 50th birthday and being three years clear
of cancer . But, during April 2013, I was on holiday in Morocco and
struggled to climb up the hills, feeling extremely breathless. At the time I
wasn’ t sure if it was damage from the radiotherapy or my just being
generally unfit, but it planted a seed in my mind.
In July 2013, as well as the breathlessness, I had a small  amount of
discomfort and went to the hosp ital to ask for a scan. The resul ts showed a
shadow on my lung/chest wall. On having a video camera inserted into my
chest it was discovered that I had 2 litres (3 pints) of fluid almost totally
crushing my lung and seven sites of tumours, the largest being the size of an
egg.
I spent nine days in hospital to recover and was draining constant fluid. I
was sent home with a tube that came out of my chest and every day or two I
had to attach it to a special bottle and drain off the fluid that kept forming.
After it being there for a couple of months, I realized that I had to become
proactive and take control. It wasn’ t enough to just will it away .
This is when I began visualization. Every day, I would lay on the floor with
my feet on a Chi machine – you rest your feet in the machine and it rocks
quickly from side to side, sending a ripple through the body . When it stops
after around 15 minutes, you place your feet on the floor , and in the
stillness, you feel a rush of Chi flow through the body .
Having seen a photograph of the inside of my chest I had a very clear visual
of what my tumours looked like, and so I imagined that the Chi was healing
light energy flowing through my body . I focused on the large tumour and
visualized the healing light melting it and the bad cells flowing into the
fluid and out of my body .
I consta ntly spoke to the tumours and the fluid and said thank  you for the
lessons that they had brought, and that I was a happier and better person for
having them. I said thank you, but I didn’ t need them anymore, and so it
was time to say goodbye. I thanked the fluid for cleansing the tumours and
allowing the cells to be released . I thanked the tube for being the means of
removing the cancer from my body .
One day, I could feel that the large tumour was gone and so I focused on the
smaller one. When that was gone, I focused on cleansing the chest wall, my
lungs, and my whole body .
Nine months after having the tube inserted, I had it removed. There was a
moment of fear when I realized that with no tube it was up to me now to
keep the fluid away and so I carried on with the cleansing visualization.
Now , in 2017, I still have scans every three to four months but for the last
three years there’ s been no activity . To begin with, the doctors said there
was ‘No change’. Eventually , when pushed, they admitted that from the
scan there was no visible sign of tumours and I’ve been classed as in
remission.
Every day, I give thanks to my cancer for waking me up and forcing me to
make changes; the most important ones were to learn to love myself and not
to be scared. I give thanks to my body for being healthy; I thank  myself for
having the strength and confiden ce to deal with it in this way. I give thanks
for the love and support I receiv e from my family and friends and the love
that I have to share with them.
I give thanks that my journey has helped me to be a better person and I use
all that I’ve learn ed and discovered to help and treat the people around me. I
know that I’m a happier and more multifaceted person than I was pre-
cancer . I give thanks that I’ve been guided towards the people, books and
workshops that have been life-changing and life-saving for me. David,
thank you from the bottom of my heart!
Cynthia’ s story – Healing sparkles
When I became unwell in January 2015 while living in Italy – I had
difficulty breathing, fatigue and a constant cough – visualizing myself
healthy was instinctive. The illness was a mystery that took months to
solve. Over the six months it took to reach a diagnosis, I practis ed speaking
kindly to myself  and listening to my body , resting as needed. I believe that
your mind is your most powerful tool and I’m careful about what I feed my
mind.
I returne d to Canada in late May 2015 and received a diagnosis of non-
Hodgkin’ s lymphoma, diffuse large B cell, primary mediastinal.
Immediately upon hearing the diagnosis, I visualized what I was hearing.
There was a 9cm (3in) mass in and on my left lung and I visua lized it as a
large orange in my chest. I kept my sense of humour and laughed about not
being a human fruit bowl and that the orange could leave at any time.
During chemotherapy , I visualized sparkles travelling throughout my body ,
escorting the chemo drugs to the cells they were targeting. The sparkles
worked to protect all the other cells, organs and tissues in my body . I let my
creative imagina tion have fun with the scenarios and changed them as side
effects presented dif ferent issues.
I made a commi tment to make no internet searches and used books to find
pictures to enhance my visualizations. Visualizing healthy pink lungs, veins,
nerves, hair follicles, and the components of blood as my neutrophil levels
dropped. Creatin g and practising visualizations to meet my body ’s changing
needs for comfort and healing on a daily basis.
As chemo went on I visualized sparkles and the chemo drugs working
together to shrink the orange to the size of a mandarin orange at the halfway
test point! The size had been dramatically reduced and was similar to that of
a flat mandarin.
I contin ued to visualize the mass shrinking to a tiny wild blueberry that
would blow away. In December the final PET scan result was no remaining
active cancer cells. Not even a wild blueberry! Some scar tissue remains
that I continue to visualize encased in sparkles to keep it safely contained.
In January 2016 I began radiation and I stepped up my visualization
scenario. While in the radiation  machine I visualized five green beams as
the radia tion and animated sparkle shields in my chest to protect the vital
organs and skin while directing  the beams to the remaining microscopic
cells. The 15 rounds of radiation  went well, with no visual effect on my skin
at all.
I’m happy to say I’m now two years-plus on the good side. Visualization
helped during treatment and continues to assist with side effects . I used it as
needed, several times a day, to deal with the changing issues  throughout
treatment and post-treatment healing. Throughout my journey , I shared my
story on my blog, www .cinziasadventure.com , which has beco me the basis
for my self-published book, Sparkle On! One Woman’ s Creative Way of
Reclaiming Her Wellness and Living Life. In addition to the book, I’m
planning workshops and speak ing engagements to share the message of
using a creative mindset and visualization to deal with life’s challenges. My
website is www .sparkleon.ca .
Kim’ s story – My blasting session
I used visualization when I was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2012. Soon
after that diagno sis, I just kept visualizing myself fit, healthy and very much
alive.
I had to receive chemotherapy , so every time I had a session I visualized a
big blast zapping at my cells. I used to say, ‘I’m going in for my blasting
session.’
Every time I described chemotherapy , I used those words, ‘blast and
blasting’, so it had more of an impact. I continually visualize d this every
day.
I think visualization is so powerful and so I’ve completed a course on
creative visualiz ation and hope to embark on a career teaching it. I’m so
grateful to have survived breast cancer and see it as a blessing rather than a
curse as I never take anything for granted and I’ve changed for the better as
a person.
Petula’ s story – Recycling cancer  cells
I was diagnosed  with inoperable breast cancer over 10 years ago. I was only
given a 15 per cent chance of survival. The cancer had spread into my
lymphatic system and into my neck. I had chemotherapy and radiotherapy
to shrink the tumours and then if anything was left in my breast it was to be
surgically removed.
While I was having my treatment I visualized a rabbit, whom I called ‘Pure
Health’, jumping into my body and eating all the cancer cells. The cancer
cells were food for the rabbit and he loved eating them. They didn’ t harm
him because they were his food. He looked so healthy and had a really
glossy coat. When he was full up he jumped out of my body and ran off into
the woods where, at a certain spot, he excreted all his waste products. At
that spot, in time, a beautiful tree grew . Everyone who saw the tree, or sat
under it, felt great peace and wellbeing. It was called a healing tree.
I did this visualization at least two or three times a day and every time I had
my treatment. At the end of my treatment the doctors were amazed at how
well I’d respond ed to it. The cancer had disappeared, and I didn’ t need an
operation.
Another visualization I did was to see the cancer cells as balloons and to
see, two or three times a day, the balloons popping. The empty shells were
then flushed through my body and came out as waste products and were
sent into the earth to be changed to positive ener gy for the good of all.
The third visualization was for me to stand under a shower of pure, healing
water . The wate r entered through the crown of my head  and flowed down
the insid e of my body , flushing all the cancer cells out. The water came out
of my feet as black, thick liquid at first. This gradually changed to a brown,
thinner liquid and then to clear water when the cancer cells had been
removed. This water went down the drain to the earth, again to be changed
into a positive energy. Then I visualized a pure white healing light filling
the spaces in my body where the cancer cells had been.
Also, every night I say to myse lf before I go to sleep, ‘I have a wonderful
body that is glowing with perfect health,’  and ‘Every single living cell in
my body is whole, normal and perfect.’  I also visualize my body full of pink
healing light, as this is the colou r for love and harmony . Another thing I do
is to chant ‘Om’  into my left breast, and at a certain note I can feel the tissue
vibrating. I’m sure that all this has helped me, as I’m still alive and well
more than 10 years later. The doctors and nurses still marvel at the fact that
I’m so healthy .
Cathie’ s story – Rabbits don’t get lymphoma
Ten years ago, I was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma. I had very
large tumours in my abdomen and groin. I was scheduled for chemotherapy
but was told to wait for five weeks to see how my disease was going to
evolve. It was believed to be a slow-growing type but because the tumours
were really large it was thought  that the cancer might be about to mutate to
a more aggressive form.
During my wait, I did a lot of reading and had reflexology three times a
week. I’d started to train as a reflexologist so I knew it could help. My
reflexologist told me of the real dangers of chemo – something I’d not been
made aware of. To cut a long story short, I decided not to have any
conventional treatment and relied on an organic diet and vegetable juicing,
long walks in natur e and lots of laughter with friends. I also gave up
teaching.
But I did use visualization to focus my cells on getting rid of the cancer .
First of all, I told myself my body was not my enemy , but that some of its
cells had lost their way somehow . I drew a picture repre senting my
cancerous cells as grey blobs without much shape or substance.  I then drew
my T-cells as little piranha fish – they had very focused, friendly eyes and
very sharp teeth!
None of the grey blobs stood a chance! I visualized them taking great big
mouthfuls out of the cancerous  cells, and vacuuming them up into their
little stomachs… they obviously enjoyed their food. I even ‘heard’ them go,
‘Miam, miam, miam!’  as they ate (that’ s ‘Yum, yum’… I’m French).
At first, I had to make a point of going through this visualization several
times a day, but very soon it became part of my every waking  moment. It
was as though I had a little TV screen in the corner of my mind that was
constantly showing the same cartoon. It made me smile a lot.
I also used affirmations, which varied. At the very beginning, when I still
had a lot of anxiety about being diagnosed and dying, I made one up, a
variation of ‘Every day, in every  way, I am getting better and better .’ Mine
was: ‘My immune system is very strong and every day my cells are getting
cleaner and healthier , my immune system is very strong.’  Somehow the
repetition seemed to be necessary in order to imprint on my brain.
It worked, because whenever I woke up during the night in the grip of
panic, my affirmation would kick in and I’d be able to go back to sleep after
focusing on it for a while. Then the next night I’d wake up again and, this
time, virtually as soon as my eyes opened, I’d hear the words in my brain
and go back to sleep immediately , reassured that, even in sleep, my body
was still working for me.
After a while, I’d barely open one eye and hear my head filled with my
affirmation: the tape was on without my having to switch it on, so to speak!
After I realized that, I never woke up during the night again.
I’d also played with the affirmation during the day: I’d take a mirror and
pretend to be talking to somebody else and say, to the mirror , ‘My immune
system is very strong, you know!’  and more often than not, I’d end up
laughing at the thought of some body walking in on me while I was having
this demented conversation with my mirror .
I also used affirmations to tackle certain emotional issues that were at the
root of my cancer. The very simple one suggested by Louise Hay – ‘I love
and approve of myself, all is well’  – proved impossible at first. I couldn’ t
look at myself and say, ‘I love and approve of myself,’  without either crying
or laughing hysterically… Still, using Louise Hay I looked at the
affirmation to do with cancer as being a deep hurt – a long-standing
resentment, etc. – and it hit home. So, I also did my best with ‘I lovingly
forgive and release all of the past.’  I still use this one today and feel my
heart open up as I say it.
I was diagnosed in April, on my 45th birthday , and by December my
cancerous tumo urs had decreased by 70 per cent. By the begin ning of the
next year they had all disappeared. You can check all these facts: my
consultant at the Vale of Leven Hospital (in Scotland) is Dr Patricia Clarke.
Here’ s to a life of no limits!
Author ’s note: Cathie has since written a book about her experience:
Rabbits Don’ t Get L ymphoma .
Post-polio Syndr ome
Mary’ s story – My master  electrician
Eleven years ago (2007), I was diagnosed with Post-polio syndrome, a
progressive neuromuscular disease. My life came to a screeching halt.
I was at the height of an award -winning career as a VA (Veterans Affairs)
social worker , yet was told that if there was any ‘hope’  of stabilizing the
symptoms as they were, I neede d to quit my job and be prepar ed to spend
the rest of my life in a wheelcha ir, possibly needing a feeding tube because
I would aspirate my food due to weakness on the left side of my
oesophagus.
I was weak and in chronic pain, anxious and depressed. I got still and asked
for Divine Guidance, and I began writing poetry in which I imagined
myself being whole, healed and free in my body . My first poem was
‘Running the Race’  – yes, I know, pretty incredible, as I sat in a leg brace
using a cane and at times a wheelchair for mobility . I went on to run the
2009 Boston Marathon as a mobility-impaired runner!
In addition to using poetry as a vehicle for visualization, I meditated several
times a day, imagining God as my master electrician, rewiring my
neuromuscular system and healing the effects of both childho od paralytic
polio and severe childhood trauma that manifested as Post-polio syndrome.
Three years ago, my left knee ‘blew out’. I was pushing myself way too
hard in my running without cross training. An MRI indicated an atrophied
gastric muscle, bone spurs, degenerative changes due to osteoarthritis and
multiple knee surgeries, shredded cartilage and a fatty lipoma. I was told to
stop running and prepare to need a total knee replacement in a few years’
time.
I returned to visualization and found my way to a wonderful chiropractor
who supported my use of it; I also had a ‘goals, not limits’  philosophy . The
chiropractor was also a personal trainer who prescribed exercises to support
me as a runner . We used Kinesio tape and the power of visualization to heal
my knee and grow a new gastric muscle.
I upped my game in terms of time spent in meditation, using visualization
that harnessed the power of my mind and the Divine within and around me.
In Janua ry I crossed the finish line of my third Bermuda half-marathon in as
many years.
Now , at the age of 64, I’m not in a wheelchair and I’ve not had a total knee
replacement. Instead, I live a full, vibrant life through the power of
visualizing myself from illness to wellness – claiming my birthright to be
healthy .
The visualizations came to me as I wrote poetry , and initially they came in
the cadence of Dr Seuss. The significance there is that after I contracted
paralytic polio as a child, my physical therapist (who was my Earth angel),
given my parent s’ drug and alcohol addictions, read Dr Seuss to me before
every physical therapy session and then had me recite back to her in tandem
so that I wouldn’ t be focused on the pain of the treatments. Pretty advanced
for the late 1950s and early 60s!
So, the visualizations included running and splashing in puddles and seeing
myself as whole and free and healthy . I visualized myself dancing again as a
ballerina. All with the rhythm and cadence of Dr Seuss rhymes that I know
inspired me to heal mind, body and soul. I had a pen and paper with me at
all times to write down the visualizations. I had literally no pain when I
visualized myse lf free and happy without my leg brace… I was there
completely in the moment.
For the knee, I pored over the MRI results to understand what needed to
heal. I imagined the bone spurs  dissolved. I imagined surgery that would
repair the torn cartilage, even though the doctor said there wasn’ t enough
good cartilage left to repair and grow new cartilage. I’d watched my own
arthroscopic surgery for a torn meniscus, so I had a wonderful mental image
to use. I imagi ned the Kinesio tape my chiropractor used stimulating
healing.
My chiropractor suggested I read You Are the Placebo  by Dr Joe Disp enza,
a book that built on my beliefs  about my body’ s ability to heal with love
(I’d learned those beliefs from  the writer and retired surgeon Dr Bernie
Siegel – especia lly from the story of Evy McDonald, who healed her life
and healed her body from the degenerative neurological disease
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS).
So, I used Dr Dispenza’ s meditation suggestions to heal my knee. I also
used a meditatio n from the healer and teacher Dr Mitchell May, saying ‘I
am a child of God – this is easy for God to heal,’  and I’d imagine myself in
an MRI  machine being beamed with healing love and light, making
everything new .
When I wasn’ t writing poetry , I meditated several times through out the day.
God was my master electrician and I imagined my body as a house that
needed to have the loose connections repaired. God came in with all of the
tools that an electrician uses to strip damaged wires and reconnect them
with a soldering  iron. I imagined myself as a brand-new house with a new
structure to support the new wiring.
I now meditate at least twice a day, journal when I need to, and if/when I
feel pain during the day, I pause to visualize myself as healthy , whole and
healed.
Psoriasis
Esther ’s story – OK, psoriasis, time for  a vacation
When I was 17, I developed persistent itching on the back of my scalp.
After a few months, I could feel that the skin had thickened and the little
‘patch’  that had formed was expanding. A doctor concluded that it was
psoriasis, which  is a condition in which skin cells divide seven to 10 times
faster than they’re supposed to, making the skin thicker , red, scaly and
itchy . I was also told it’s a genetic condition that’s (supposedly) incurable.
‘Well, there you have it, then,’  I thought.
In the years that followed, the patch kept expanding. Eventually , it ended up
covering the back half of my scalp, but it stayed under the hairline. After
that, I guess I just got used to it being there. It itched, so I scratched. It
flaked, so I got used to brushing skin flakes off my shoulders all the time,
so peop le wouldn’ t wonder if I had a severe case of dandru ff and just
needed to look after myself better .
In the years after the diagnosis, I tried every treatment on the market –
ointments, creams, shampoos. Some soothed the itching a bit, some reduced
the thickness of the skin a little, but nothing really got rid of it – which is
what I was hoping for on some level, in spite of the ‘incurable’  factor .
Some years later, as I was prescribed yet another ointment, I looked up its
side effects: it was a corticosteroid cream that could allegedly cause some
hideous side effects, including making the psoriasis worse! I was fed up. I’d
had enough. I figured that I’d rather just have psoriasis! So, that’s when I
decided to give up. No more creams. No more greasy ointments. No more
expensive sham poos. Just get on with it and live with it. It just seemed like
a lot less hassle.
I’d always had an interest in alternative healing methods, and as time went
on I learned more and more about holistic approaches to health, and about
the mind–body connection. Twenty years after the initial diagn osis, I came
across David Hamilton’ s book How Your Mind Can Heal Your Body  (1st
edition). It was like I’d found the missing piece of the puzzle. He talked
about the placeb o effect, which I find immensely interesting. It was like this
gave me a nudge, and I finally realized that I was ready . Ready to send
psoriasis back to where it came from. Not in an angry way. Not in a
resentful way . But in a peaceful and knowing way . No resistance.
In the book, David shares stories from people telling how they cured
themselves of serious health conditions and diseases such as cancer .
Thankfully , my psoriasis isn’t a life-threatening condition, although some
forms of it can be very serious. But I realized I could use these same
methods, these tools, to accomplish what I’d set out to do.
Some years before I found Davi d’s book, I’d heard a story of a child with a
terminal brain tumour who, instead of having to under go invasive (and
futile) treatments, was asked what he enjoyed doing. (Perhaps I’m making
up some of the details here, but it gets the point across.)
He said he liked to play Space Invaders on his computer , so that’s what he
got to do. As he was playing and shooting the aliens, he was told to imagine
he was shooting at the tumour in his head, which would crumb le down, bit
by bit, just like the aliens in the computer game. Some months later, the boy
announced that the tumour had gone, and he wasn’ t ill anymore. Lo and
behold, this was confirmed by the doctors after they ran their tests.
I loved this story . The visualizations described in David’ s book were of a
similar nature, although each person had a different way of approaching it –
some used forceful methods (such as shooting at their tumou r, chipping
away pieces of it), whereas others used more gentle ones (such as
embracing the tumour cells, thanking them for the point they were making
and asking them nicely to leave).
So, I made up my own versi on. I decided to visualize myself small,
standing on my own shoulder , and talking to the skin cells on my scalp. I
told them  that I appreciated them , that they’d worked really hard, but it was
now time for a vacation – to stop working so hard. At the time, to say it felt
silly was an understatement. It felt downright ridiculous, in fact. But I just
laughed at myself and stuck with it.
One day, I was visiting my Reiki Master and I told her about the
visualizations I was doing. She gave me another piece of the puzzle. I’d
gotten so used to having psorias is that all the habits surrounding it (such as
brushing the flakes off my shoul ders) had become almost subconscious. She
suggested I take the ‘reverse’  approach. By brushing my shou lders, I was
giving my scalp an excuse to flake! That made me realize that the
visualizations were only one (important) part of it.
The other part of the equation was to get myself in a conscious attitude of ‘I
used to have psoriasis’, rather than the habituated subconscious attitude of
‘I have psoriasi s.’ So, I had to stop brushing my shoulders. I had to stop
being conscious of skin flakes. I had to feel, do and be as if I didn’ t have
psoriasis any more.
I think this was what took the biggest effort. Breaking a habit of 20 years
wasn’ t easy, but as it turned out, it wasn’ t impossible either . Every time I
caught myself brushing my shoulders, I forced myself to stop. Every time I
noticed those skin flakes on my clothes, I just left them there. It was
difficult and frustrating – it felt almost alien, somehow – but I persisted and
gradually broke the habit. That, in combination with a loving approach to
self-healing, enabled me to say after about 12–18 months of visualizing,
that ‘I used to have psoriasis’  – and it was actually true.
I’ve been psoriasis-free for about three years now. In addition to
visualizing, I also started using clay (rhassoul clay from Morocco) during
that time to wash my hair. My hairdresser said it’s made my hair thicker and
healthier , and not having to fight its way through that thick skin is definitely
helping! I still use the clay now – it’s ideal for problem or sensitive skin,
and I love to use it as a body wash too.
I feel that this experience has given me a glimmer of insight into the power
of the mind… we don’t know half of its true potential. But I hope that
visualization will become an important part of modern medicine sooner
rather than later, so that potentially harmful treatments are a plan B rather
than a first choice. Here’ s hoping!
Debbie’ s story – The old ways
I was diagnosed with an autoi mmune illness called generalized pustular
psoriasis (also known as von Zumbusch), a rare form of psoriasis that can
be lethal. The only country in the world that’s done any sort of research on
it is Japan.
In Febru ary 2014, the entire illness started with a throat infec tion. The T-
cells started to push up through my skin instead of going around my
bloodstream and doing their thing. This was the start of guttate psoriasis,
which is not common in women, particularly those over the age of 30.
Guess what? I’m a woman over the age of 30.
In March, it got out of control on my skin and the doctors thought it had
turned into plaque psoriasis over my chest, stomach, back, arms and legs. In
June, my skin started to look and feel as if it had sunburn, when I’d not
been out in the sun. This is known as erythrodermic psoriasis (all the skin is
red, inflamed and painful).
In July 2014, on top of the erythrodermic psoriasis, pustules started to form
(they look like small blisters or severe acne). They were full of fluid.
Instead of the skin renewing itself every 30 days, it was now renewing itself
every two hours . The pustules cycled on my skin every few days, and at the
point where I couldn’ t touch my arms (due to the pain), I was admitted to
hospital. I knew that if the illness got to the lungs and heart, there would be
very little chance of recovering from it, and it can also kill through
dehydration.
In Augu st 2014, I was put on the immune suppressant methotrexate. Just
over two years later, in Decemb er 2016, I found out through one of David’ s
workshops that the brain can’t often tell the difference between  what’ s real
and what’ s not, so I started a daily routine of my own prescription, and after
a hospital appointment I came of f the immune suppressants.
The visualization that I created and have been doing is as follows. I imagine
that I knock on the doors of my immune system and big bouncers come to
the door. I ask to go to the T-cells and I’m taken to what looks like a cave
and they all appear to be minions. I tell them that they need to do something
different and they just need to go around the bloodstream and that’s all –
they don’ t need to push up through the skin.
The T-cells all reply in unison: ‘Oh, the old ways!’  One of them has a
plastic dinghy and he jumps  inside it and starts to go around my
bloodstream. Finally, when he gets back, he shouts, ‘That was fun,’ and the
cells all start to cheer and line up to go around my bloodstrea m. They all
jump in the dinghy and start to go around.
It’s March 2018 as I write this. I was told that I’d get a flareup while
coming off the immunosuppressants. I didn’ t! I was also told that I’d be
hospitalized at least once a year. I haven’ t been! I’ve hardly had any of the
pustules on my skin, even though I’ve had some plaque psoriasis. I’ve not
taken any immu nosuppressants for over a year. I’m not cured, but I believe
that with a bit more time, I will be.
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chr onic Fatigue Syndr ome
(ME/CFS)
Rebecca’ s story – Visualizing Christmas tr ee lights
I was diagnosed  with moderate to severe ME/CFS in January 2012. I had
very little energy; I was debilita ted and unable to do much. At 47, I had to
retire from my wonderful career , and was dependent on my partner for
many aspects of living. There was/is no treatment for ME/CFS.
My partner came across David Hamilton’ s book How Your Mind Can Heal
Your Body  (1st edition) in December 2013. I completely got it! My
background in nursing and complementary therapy of over 20 years
provided a baseline of understanding. I completely bought into the concept.
Nothing else was working, but I believed this practice would work for me.
On 11 Decembe r 2013, I starte d with an hour of visualization . As it was
close to Christm as I visualized that all my cells, throughout my whole body ,
were lit up just like Christmas  tree lights. They shone so, so brightly , a
beautiful white glow . At the same time, I imagined the white glow in each
cell to be my energy. Filling each cell with deep, strong energy, like a fully
charged battery . I could feel and sense the energy. I saw my whole body
lighting up as soon as I closed my eyes to visualize, lying on my bed,
slowly breathing, calm and relaxed.
It took three days of one-hour Christmas tree lights visualization  to shift the
balance from ‘illness to wellness’. There was a certain syner gy,
harmonizing my whole body – it was just incredible! I felt a definite change
on the first day of visualizatio n, and by the third day, I felt the ‘black
shadow’  had lifted. I tested it! Wearing only my swimming costume, I
jumped into the sea on Boxing  Day, known as the ‘Boxing Day Dip’. I
checked… no ME/CFS sympto ms. No symptoms the next day, none the
third day .
I used this visualization technique every single day for two months for
approximately 20 minutes at a time. Throughout these days I’d sing, ‘I am
Fit; I am Well; I am Full of Energy’ as a Christmas carol. At times it was a
melody of chorus as my partner joined me and sang.
I did this affirmation every single day for well over three months. I lost
count of how many times a day. The words sprang to my lips as I woke up,
as I cleaned my teeth, as I dressed, as I walked the dogs. The words were
there consistently and persistent ly throughout this period of time in my life.
During the following months my energy levels consistently rechar ged with
sustained energy. I was able to live again, enjoying a more balanced
lifestyle. The rest is history!
Cardiovascular  Conditions
Lyndsey’ s story – Turning up the dial
I bought the first edition of How Your Mind Can Heal Your Body  when it
came out – in fact, I feel like I’ve been reading mind/body and visualization
books incessantly since my teenage years – starting with Louise Hay’ s You
Can Heal Y our Life  – and now I know why!
I got married in my early thirties and planned to start a family immediately ,
but it didn’ t happen for us. But I could ‘see’ my children and I had vivid
dreams about them preparing to arrive!
I was absolutely thrilled to get pregnant and I gave birth to a scrumptious
son a little after my 40th birthday . It was an anxious pregnancy , and I lost a
lot of blood at the birth and was taken straight into surgery. I spent the first
few days in the high dependency unit, where my heart was beating too
quickly and I had dif ficulty breathing.
I was diagnosed with idiopathi c cardiomyopathy – a condition where the
heart is unable to pump blood around the body efficiently . I was in severe
heart failure. I was put on a medication programme and received excellent
care, but was told that it was ‘highly likely’  that I wouldn’ t make it past the
next 12 months.
I knew I had to get my heart’ s ‘ejection fraction’  up to the normal range of
above 55. I’d imagine turning a dial up to above this figure. I pictured it as
often as I passed the heating dial in our house. It’s at the bottom of the
stairs, so I’d visualize at least twice a day. It would be very quick though –
imagining that it was the dial that turned my ejection fraction up. In my
mind, I’d see the 55 and quickly turn it around past that number. People
would tell me that I looked far too well for someone so poorly .
I also pictured the cardiologist telling me that I’d achieved this number and
I visual ized being vibrant and healthy . This was more of a protracted
daydream rather than structured sessions where I’d imagine the
conversation with the cardiolo gist and also telling friends and family
afterwards, which felt more animated/emotive. It’s tricky to do anything
structured with a baby/toddler so this was more when I felt inspired to, but
also to countera ct the times when I did feel worried/negative/panicky . I’d
say that I did this about once a week.
I did David’ s ‘I Heart Me’ online programme and I took time to talk to my
heart and show it some love. I regularly bought my heart red roses!
Just over a year after diagnosis, I was here to celebrate my son’s first
birthday , and an MRI revealed that my ejection fraction had surpassed 55
and had gone from severe to normal! In fact, my last MRI reading was 62.
I’m currently using visualizatio n to upgrade my health further , and I’ll
always believe that if we can see it, we can be it! I’m not out of the woods
yet with my heart – it’s still enlar ged so I’m working on it being more
compact and, also, I often imagine mini workers in there making it more
efficient!
Kevin’ s story – Big blobby immune cells
I’d finished working on my PC in my bedroom and had got the ironing
board out. In those few seconds, my right thumb became completely
swollen and solid.
My immediate thought was that this could be a thrombosis and the last
thing I wanted was for it to dislodge and end up in my brain or heart. I went
straight to my local hospital’ s A&E department. By this time my thumb had
started turning blue, which added to my fear .
I was referred to a local GP (I was told a referral from him back to the
hospital would be quicker than waiting). He was very thorough and
examined my fingers and eyes, told me I had a fever and said that he could
hear a heart murmur . Putting all these together , he thought I could have a
heart valve infection, which was potentially very serious and might involve
me having to have valve replacement sur gery.
He explained that bacteria can form on the valve and that bits of it break off
and can cause clots (which is what he thought was causing my blue thumb).
He telephoned the hospital and told them he was referring me immediately .
By this time, my thumb was completely blue and still swollen solid.
Walking back to the hospital, I thought about how our lives can change in a
matter of seconds. I became very aware of my mortality (not necessarily a
bad thing but, wow , can it bring on lots of anxiety and raw fear!).
After further tests in A&E, the doctors there concluded that it could well be
a heart valve infection. I was admitted to hospital very late that night, with
an echocardiogram and chest X-rays planned for the next day .
It was difficult to sleep and I lay there thinking of the things I still wanted to
do in my life and how I didn’t want to have major surgery with the
possibility of dying. The more I thought along those lines, the more
frightened I became. My fear fed on itself and grew , until I suddenly
shouted ‘Stop!’  to myself in my mind.
I remind ed myself that there was an alternative way of respon ding to this
situation. I made an agreement with myself that it was OK to acknowledge
my fear rather than suppress it, but it would do me more harm to let it
develop into a downward spiral of negativity . I decided I wasn’ t going to
need heart valve surgery and that I could heal myself. I wasn’ t going to die
and I wasn’ t going to allow my fear to have a negative impact on my
situation. I started to talk to my body , reminding it of how wonderful,
powerful and strong it was and how it has amazing abilities to heal itself. I
encouraged it to get into ‘super -heal’  mode!
I suddenly got a visualization in my mind that was so spontaneous and clear
that it surprised me. I was inside my heart, looking at one of the valves. I
saw the three parts of it that open and then close together to form a seal and
I saw the bacteria on it.
I then saw that I had a pressure hose in my hand, the kind you use to clean
paths, and I knew I was about to blast the bacteria off my heart valve. But I
realized that if I did that, bits of bacteria would then be free in my
circulatory syste m and could cause further clots. Suddenly , I visualized big
blobby immune system cells forming a protective line a little distance away .
I knew they would envelop and absorb the bits of bacteria that would be
blasted of f and would prevent them doing further damage.
I started the pressure hose. Having used one before, I knew how it felt, and
about the kickback when the pressurized water hit something. I worked the
blast of water over my heart valve and watched bits of bacteria flying off, to
be swamped by my blobby cells.
I drifted off to sleep, but whenever I woke up (which was frequently!), I’d
replay the visualization, along with talking to my body in really positive
and powerful ways. I’d encourage it and tell it I had faith in the massive
amounts of energy and healing abilities it had. I felt a determi nation to be
totally healthy and vibrantly alive and remain so for many years to come.
The next morning, I was exami ned by a consultant and a team of doctors.
Interestingly , I no longer had a fever and my thumb was less swollen and
had started to soften. I then had my echocardiogram and chest X-rays,
which both indicated that I have a great heart! There was no sign of
bacterial infection.
I cannot , in all honesty , say that I definitely had a heart valve infection
before my visua lization. Howev er, no consultant or GP (at the time or in
follow-up appoi ntments) has been able to provide an alternative explanation
for the symptoms I displayed. At the very least, my visualization enabled
me to get into a positive frame of mind and eliminate my fear. At most, who
knows? It might just have saved my life.
Helen’ s story – Pink hearts with angel wings
Two weeks ago, I was told that my baby had an irregular heartbeat of 167
beats per minute  (bpm). After doing healing work every day (going into the
cells of my baby’s heart and putting in pink hearts with angel wings on
them to represent love, and the words ‘Normal regular heartbeat’), I was
told yesterday that the bpm had come down to 147 and that the beat was
totally normal and regular . I’m not sure whether it was all the love and
healing that did it, but I’d like to think it was.
Flora’ s story – The gobblers
About nine years ago I was quite unwell and thought I had bowel cancer .
All the tests were negative, but before the test results were known, a blood
test showed that I had a dangerously high cholesterol level and a blockage
in the left carotid artery . The trouble with the bowels had been  because of
the amount of cholesterol in my system!
One of the doctors had been sounding my heart and around the neck area,
which I thought was rather weird at the time. He later told me that when he
decided to practise in Scotla nd he’d always check for heart/stroke
potentials. It was thanks to him that the blockage in my carotid artery was
found. This was why I was having dizzy spells.
At that time, I knew nothing of cholesterol problems but, as is my wont, I
read everything I could. My cholesterol reading was 11 and I was put on
statins. I had a vegetarian diet but was very fond of cheese and butter and
cream, so they were all cut out and I lost a stone in weight.
After about nine months, during which time I was telling the doctor about
the muscle pains and tiredness, etc., to no avail, I was taken to hospital with
a suspected stroke. I’d woken up with no movement in the left side of my
body . Thank God I’d not had a stroke, but my muscles had been paralysed
by the statins.
The doctors wanted to change the drug type, but I refused any more. I was a
great follower of Louise Hay and positive thinking, so I set to with my
visualization exercises. I pictur ed my carotid artery with the blockage. I
thought it was probably not a good idea to blast it, as I didn’ t want bits
floating along the arteries.
Many years ago, the very first computer game my daughter had was called
‘Parkie’, in which you were the ‘parkie’  chasing round the flowerbeds to
catch these ‘things’  before they gobbled the flowers. (They were like a
yellow ball that opened like a mouth and ate the flowers.) So, I pictured the
blockage dissolving slowly and good cells, just like the ‘gobblers’, coming
along and sucki ng up the dissol ved cholesterol, taking it out of my system
and disposing of it safely .
It worked. I no longer have a blockage. I now control my cholesterol by
positive thinking and diet and exercise.
Travel Sickness
Pat’s story – Imaginary ginger
Since I was a child I’ve suffered from travel sickness on buses. I’ve tried
travel sickness pills, but to no avail. I often travel to Iona (a tiny island off
the southwest coast of Mull in Scotland’ s Inner Hebrides) but dreaded the
bus journey across Mull.
Then someone recommended sucking crystallized ginger – and it worked.
But one day on the ferry from Oban to Mull I realized I’d forgotten my
crystallized ginger. I dreaded getting on the bus. However , once  on the bus,
I imagined getting some crystal lized ginger out of a bag, putting it in my
mouth and sucking it. I got all the way across Mull without feeling sick.
Eventually I was able to travel on buses without even visualizing and on
one occasion when the train from Oban to Glasgow was full, I did the
journey by bus with no travel sickness. Now I’ve no problems on buses.
Verrucas/Plantar  Warts
Kevin’ s story – A protective mesh
Somehow , I developed a verruca on the inside of my right big toe, towards
the top. It showed all the typical signs – a raised area of skin with a black
centre where the virus that caused it had taken hold. I was tempted to use
one of the freeze  kits you can now buy at the chemist; however , the location
of the verruca, on a sensitive part of my toe, made me squirm.
So, I decided I’d try a visualiz ation. I sat down and closed my eyes and
relaxed. I created an intention of a visualization that would be appropriate
in this case. Almost immediately I had a clear picture in my mind of being
underneath the verruca. I could see the black centre of it above me.
Suddenly the lower area resem bled a building site! A crisscross mesh of
protective skin formed between the verruca and the skin below . The mesh
looked like the metal framework around which concrete is poured to
strengthen it. There was a clear inner intention that the virus would never be
able to penetrate  this protective mesh of skin. In fact, this layer  was slowly
moving up, to push the verruca of f my toe.
Although I had this visualization only once, it was very clear and powerful,
with a feeling of intention behind it.
About a week later, after my shower , I wondered if anything had happened.
To my disappoin tment, the black centre of the verruca was still on my toe.
However , to my delight, when out of curiosity I put my finge rnails either
side of it, of f it came! The skin is now almost healed.
Tomek’ s story – Dancing them away
I had two giant verrucas on my feet. The one on the left foot was taking
almost the whol e surface of my big toe. David told me that I could heal
them with visua lization. I did so and they disappeared! Wow! I’d had them
for five or six years and I’d tried everything (I burned them, took drugs and
herbs), and now they’re gone. Now I will go and have a foot massage –
hehehehe!
First, I imagined  that I was burning them with acid. Sometime s I was just
brushing them with an acid brush and sometimes I had a gun that fired acid
and I fired it on my verrucas. After one week the results were impressive.
After that I tried also to visuali ze my feet and toes without any verrucas,
just nice skin, and sometimes I imagined that I was burning them.
Ah, yes, the best part – I had on a regular basis (a couple of times a day) a
victory dance in the toilets at work or at home or in the car . Good fun.
I also noticed that, in the past, I was always negative about the verrucas.
Every time my girlfriend told me to try to do something about them, I’d say,
‘No, it won’ t work.’  So, thank you very much – 100,000,000 times.
Lupus
Lynn’ s story – The beautiful beast within
In Dece mber 1978 I had the flu. I didn’ t like having it because it rendered
me useless, aching and feeling thoroughly miserable. I made a vow that I’d
never have it again! And I neve r have! I’ve managed this with the use of
visualization and affirmations; each year, I state that I have no use for being
laid up with influenza and that I’m healthy .
Each year since 1978, upon feeling what might be the beginning of a simple
cold or flu, I’ve visualized my immune system as my own perso nal army . In
the beginning, ‘Lynn’s Army’  was equipped with bows and arrows, but over
the years they’ve evolved into an army of light fighters using beams of red
light to annihila te the attacking enemy , followed by blue light for healing
and green light for regeneration. I visualize myself inside a bubble that
alternates between blue and green and all the shades in between.
However , this didn’ t prepare me for another illness, diagnosed on Christmas
Eve 2002. I was admitted to hospital suffering from kidney failure and a
biopsy revealed systemic lupus erythematosus, or lupus. This is an
autoimmune disease that’s caused by the body’ s immune system turning
against itself. My troops had turned mutinous!
During my four-month stay in hospital I was too ill to do anything other
than sleep. I was being treated with a toxic cocktail of nuclear drugs,
including chemo therapy , and had to spend four hours, three times per week,
on dialysis.
I’m a very spiritual person and during this time I felt as though I was
surrounded and protected by angels; I guess this was how my subconscious
interpreted the feeling of trust I learned to have in those who were in charge
of my care and wellbeing. Durin g my waking hours, I was convinced there
was an aura of rainbow colours  around me, healing me and protecting me,
and I never doubted that I’d recover from my ordeal.
When I was eventually dischar ged from hospital, I couldn’ t walk due to
muscular apathy . I hated being confined to a wheelchair and this resulted in
a recurri ng dream  in which I was enjoying the freedom of being  able to run
with the wind in my hair. Considering that all my hair had fallen out due to
the ef fects of chemotherapy , this was a rather positive dream!
This dream started the deliberate visualization of seeing myself walking,
followed by actually carrying out the task and walking further each week
until I was finally able to get rid of the wheelchair . I’m still a long way off
being able to manage the daily walk of 12km (8 miles) I enjoyed before I
became ill and I’m still registered disabled. But with the use of
visualization, I remain hopeful that my ability will improve.
Coping with the lupus forced me to review my use of visualizat ion. Mutiny
is the result of disharmony amongst the troops. I began to see my illness in
a different light; lupus is a Latin word meaning ‘wolf ’ and I guess my
interest in mythology played a big part in learning to deal with my
affliction. The following is taken from an article I wrote for Lupus UK’s
official magazine, News & Views, which I entitl ed ‘The Beautiful Beast
Within’:
For many years, since childhood, I’ve been fascinated with mythology , particularly  the legends of
shape shifters: humans who can take on the shapes of animals, birds or fish. I’ve spent most of my
adult life in some form of spiritual training, which has included walking the shamanic path and
learning about power animals.
I met my power animal many years ago. She appear ed to me in the form of a beautiful wolf with
silvery-gr ey fur. We have travelled toget her and she has taught me many things . In the Native
American Indian tradition, Wolf is teacher and Rudyar d Kipling used this descriptio n in his Jungle
Book storie s. Arkela is the alpha male wolf who finds the orphaned Mowgli and rears him as his
own. This is why the Scout movement adopted the name for their pack leaders.
In Celtic mythology , Wolf is the mentor . Wolf is seen as the companion of the God of Natur e,
Cernunnos, and also the Goddess of Childbirth, Bridget; both are thought to take on the shape of the
wolf and walk betwee n the worlds. For the wolf, communication and community are of the utmost
importance. The alpha male and female are chosen for their abilities to teach and lead the others, so
co-operation is of vital importance among st the members of a pack. These qualities are things that
most people r egard as vital in a society that wishes to live harmoniously .
For me, lupus is much  more than a disease. She is the beautiful beast that resides within me. Just like
any wild animal, I have to be careful how I approach her; she needs special care and consideration,
but is happy enough to accept the offering of steak every so often! If I’ve overworke d her, she howls
and makes  me suffer for my inconsideration, and I know to step back and leave her in peace to rest
for a day or so.
Sometimes, I step back and take a good  long look at her; she is wild and ferocious, yet she is
beautiful and wise and I know she has something of the greatest importance to teach me and those
working in the field of learning about lupus. Despite the scars I carry , accredited by my own
carelessness in dealing with her, I love her. She is a part of me and I’ve learned that we can only walk
side by side if I learn to consider her needs as well as my own.
Visualizing my illness as an alter ego has helped me to cope with having
lupus. Six mont hs after I came out of hospital, my consultant remarked on
how well I was, considering that I’d been so devastatingly ill. Now , four
years on, I’m of f all lupus-related drugs and enjoying remission.
Inflammation
Natalie’ s story – Magic water
I have a genet ic condition called Ehlers Danlos syndrome Type 2 (a
connective tissue disorder) that has also triggered an autoimmune condition
called Behçet’ s disease, which is in the same family as lupus. These cause
considerable widespread pain and inflammation in joints, internal organs,
eyes, ears, mouth etc. It’s a constant daily balancing act to keep myself
functioning, and I use visualization all the time and have done for years.
A good example of a definite improvement linked to visualization happened
18 months ago when my left eye became inflamed. My whole eye was
swelling up and I could hardly see. (This has happened many times over the
years but this was a particularly bad flare-up: the inflammation was
spreading into my face and left ear .)
I can’t take antibiotics without going into hospital and having  an IV drip,
and my optician was concerned that the inflammation was spreading
towards my cornea and other areas where it could permanently damage my
sight, so I was sent to the eye hospital that day. I saw the specialist and he
wanted to operate but said there was too much swelling and inflammation
to do so imme diately; he sent me home with an antibiotic cream and
instructions to see my optician daily and to return to the hospital in a week,
unless things deteriorated further before then.
The swelling was pressing on my eyeball, he told me, and it would set hard
and have to be cut out once the inflammation around it had reduced.
I was determined that things were not going to deteriorate, so as well as
following all the advice given , I also spent an hour a day (sometimes
longer) massagi ng the area and visualizing the cream entering the skin and
dissolving the crystals in the lump around the eye. I also imagined drinking
magic water that would make any medication work more powerfully , and to
stimulate my own immune syste m to calm down while switchin g on all the
cells in my body that needed to start work to heal this area.
I repeat ed the affirmation ‘I have complete faith and trust in my body’ s
ability to heal itself.’  I imagined any infection being flushed out of my feet
into the Earth to be transformed. I could see all the cells switching on
happily , whizzing into action to heal me.
Not only did the inflammation go down but so did the lump – to the point
where I was querying with my optician whether to go back to the hospital.
We called the specialist, who said that it needed to be cut out, so I returned.
When the doctor saw me he couldn’ t believe it. He said that in all his years
of practice, he’d never seen this type of lump disappear without being
surgically removed.
He had a good look internally and agreed that it had all but completely gone
and surgery would just cause other issues. His exact words were, ‘Well, I
don’t know what you’ve been doing but keep doing it because whatever it
is, it’s working. ’ I told him what I’d been doing and he said he’d never
heard of this, but something had worked. After a month there was no sign
that a lump had ever been there.
Two weeks ago, I had a flare- up of the same condition and so I started
straight away with the visualizat ions. This time I had one check-up with the
optician on the Monday and by Friday my symptoms had disappeared
completely , no hospital visit necessary .
Last week I saw a specialist nurse who asked how I managed with all my
different EDS-related issues, and I told her, meditation and mindfulness.
She said, ‘This is what’ s keeping you going.’
Hay Fever
Elizabeth’ s story – No need to fight
I had terrible hay fever for years and had to take antihistami nes daily . I
decided to try visualization and after doing it once or twice I’ve only had to
take an antihistamine two or three times in the last eight months. I’ve had
no hay fever symptoms for the rest of the summer .
I saw a little ‘Me’ going towards my immune system, which I imagined was
made up of hundreds of little people. As I was going towards them, I
couldn’ t see them properly and vice versa – they couldn’ t see me too well
as there was quite a bit of fog. Because of this, my immune system was
attacking me, fearing that I was an enemy . However , as the fog cleared, my
immune system  and I saw each other and I said, ‘Hey , it’s me, there’ s no
need to fight. Just chill out and do only what you have to do to keep me
healthy . Take the rest of the day of f.’
I then saw the head guy shout to all his troops, ‘Hey , it’s just Elizabeth – we
don’t need to fight.’ His troops let out a cheer and started to play tennis and
lie down on beds to sunbathe. I hugged the head guy and then walked of f.
Weight Loss
Tamara’ s story – Exploding Pac-Men
I’ve struggled with being overw eight all my life. It’s my – sorry , it was my
– safety net, the barrier to keep the hurt away , and finally I made the solemn
decision that I didn’ t need the extra weight anymore.
So, I started, a few months ago, to visualize a Pac-Man type of being eating
away at my fat cells. I’ve lost about 6kg (1 stone) since January (three
months ago). It’s a long process and, aside from the unconscious changes in
my eating habits that I sometimes notice, nothing in my lifestyle has
changed – it’ s still as hectic as before.
I manage, on average, to do the visualization five times in a good week,
mostly every night before going  to sleep. I have breaks in between where I
don’t do any visualization. The visualization consists of some Pac-Man
beings eating the fat in particular points of my body and then just exploding
and disappearing into thin air .
Some others then actually transp ort the fat from the thighs and waist to my
breasts (as you probably know , the first part of the female body to go down
during weight loss is the breasts , but I gained half a cup instead by doing it
this way; it’s just marvellous!) and then I try to visualize my skin tightening
up. I finish with a whole-body scan/healing to raise the metabolism and
check for parts that may not be in tune with the rest.
The results so far are: weight loss 9.5kg (1 stone, 7lbs) in around four
months; I’ve gone from a tight size 22 to a comfortable size 20; I’ve gained
half a cup on my bra size; I’ve gone from needing at least eight hours sleep
to being comfortable with only six and not being tired; and I’ve no new
stretch marks at all!
I eat what I want when I want, when I’m hungry – takeaways included
(very busy life) – but it seems that I’ve lost interest in things like chocolate
and sweets in general, and I feel fuller sooner when I eat. The brain and the
mind are two amazing tools!
Underactive Thyr oid
Jacqui’ s story – ‘My thyr oid is functioning 100 per  cent effectively’
A few years after the birth of my second child, I started to feel progressively
unlike myself and I was sure that I had an underactive thyroid. I was
experiencing a myriad of symptoms, such as hair loss, very low mood
(totally uncharacteristic for me), constipation and severe bloating, nine
urine infections over a one-year period, weight gain (despite a very healthy
diet and exercise), eczema, joint pain, occasional limb and facial numbness,
nasal drip, severe fatigue, constant hunger .
I repeatedly attended the doctors’  surgery, only to be told that my thyroid
was still within the parameters they expected so there was nothing they
could do. At this point, I was wondering if I potentially had something like
ME, fibromyalgia or MS, but as the doctors said there was nothing that
could be done, I continued to live like this. However , I was struggling to
accept how unlike myself I felt.
A couple of years later, during my over-40s health check at my GP surgery,
the phlebotomis t tagged on a thyroid check as he could see it had been
tested before. When the test came back, my thyroid was underactive. I was
so pleased to have a diagnosis and was promptly prescribed levothyroxine –
what I thought would be the magic pill, the solution to my health dilemma.
Now this is where my case gets interesting.
The tablets worked for about three months: I had energy back, my hair was
growing again, and I lost all of the extra weight I’d put on. But then three
months in, things seemed to slow back down again, and in my mind I
believed the tablets just stopped working. Having read How Your Mind Can
Heal your Body  (1st edition), I knew what a massive impact my thoughts
could have had on my thyroid function and of the effectiveness of the
tablets.
I realized that, over the years, I’d done my thyroid function no favours by
constantly affirming that it doesn’ t work, it doesn’ t work, and then
subsequently believing the tablets had stopped working! I realized that if
my thoughts were that powerful, I could really turn this around myself by
putting in place a visualization, as so many others had done.
This is what I did. On a daily basis (sometimes multiple times a day) I’d
visualize my thyroid as pulsing  (like the heart pulses) and vibrant. As it
pulsed I’d imagine a beautiful golden thyroxine flowing all the way around
my body .
To further enhance healing, I added in other aspects, such as imagining my
intestines pulsin g and a blaster gun firing out silver sparks and clearing
blockages – all moved along by a mini snowplough. I imagined the silver
sparks dissolvin g the extra weight I was carrying around my middle and
then I’d zoom along and scrape the fat away with a cake smoot her (as used
to smooth icing on cakes).
I added in affirmations too. Each morning as I showered I’d affirm over and
over, ‘My thyroid is functioning 100 per cent effectively , my thyroid is
functioning perfectly , it’s now safe for me to lose weight.’  As I affirmed, I’d
imagine my thyroid pulsing with golden thyroxine flowing around my body
and smile. I’d keep affirming throughout the day when I had time. I
followed this routine for nearly two months.
I first noticed results three weeks in; my energy was returning and my
weight started to decrease, and this continued over a period of two years.
Whenever I felt my body slowing down again, I’d bring  back the
visualization and affirmations and within a day or two, I’d feel back on
track. I was amazed and so in awe of what positive thought and intention
could achieve.
In Febru ary last year, things slowed down again and I was unable to get
back into this positive position using the same visualization. I think as soon
as your mind believes it doesn’ t work, you need to try something new, as
the negative beliefs outweigh the belief that you can change things. I found
out I had a very low iron level, which affects the functioning of the thyroid,
so I set about amending my diet to counteract that and saw a homeopath to
help with adrenal fatigue.
After attending one of David’ s seminars, I’ve now put in place a new
visualization. As I meditate on a daily basis, I’m imagining dissolving the
negative belief that my ‘body cannot get back on track’  by sanding down a
plaster ball. As it gets smaller and smaller I blow the dust away , until I’m
left with a flat disc which I finely sand down to flat, finally dissolving all
negative belief.
I’m then focus ing on positive affirmations: ‘My thyroid is working
perfectly , my hormonal system is in perfect balance, I’m safe.’  As I affirm,
I’m imagining little happy , positive, smiley faces on my thyroid, adrenal
and pituitary glands. The smiley face on the pulsing thyroid gland turns up a
little switch and golden thyroxine starts to flow around my body .
All the time, I have a smile on my face and imagine this is really happening
and really working. Once again, I’m affirming regularly throughout the day
that my body is in balance and that my thyroid is functioning perfectly . I’m
confident I can get back to that good place again by simply focusing on the
positive, and I know that the power of my thoughts can bring about the
changes I want to see in my health.
You Can Do It
These stories show the different ways that each person used visualization –
ways that were personal to each of them. As I wrote earlier , there’ s no
‘correct’  visualization, only that which feels good to you.
In most cases, at least with serious conditions, each person used
visualization as part of a treatment modality they were under going. As far
as the research presented earlier would suggest, I’m convinced that the
visualizations helped them. At the very least, visualization gives hope, and
in most cases a visualization session is a time to relax and so can reduce
stress.
Throughout the book, I’ve done my best to present the science of the
mind–body connection in a simple and down-to-earth fashion, to convey the
different ways that the mind impacts the body . One of the main reasons I’ve
discussed science is so that, if you find yourself using visualization, you
might have some faith in yourself and the belief that what you do might
make a dif ference.
Visualization can change the microscopic structure of the brain,
expanding and contracting brain maps. It can impact the immune system
and, in many cases, perhaps therefore even change the course  of disease.
Placing your attention on your breathing, in the case of meditation, impacts
over 1,000 of your genes. Thinking of someone you love dilates arteries,
reduces blood pressure and gives the immune system a little boost.
If you can do all these things, I wonder what else you can achieve!
I don’t think we should ever underestimate what we’re capable of. I don’t
wish to give false hope, but at the same time I wish to create hope,
especially for people who need it. I guess it’s up to each of us as individuals
to decide how we wish to use our mind.
Maybe, much of what we can achieve is down to what we’re willing to
believe.
If you’re a religious person, you might then take comfort from the words
of Christ. When he healed the blind, he said, ‘According to your faith it will
be done  to you’ (Matthew 9:29) . And I’d like to draw your attention to the
fact that he said, ‘According to your faith!’  I believ e that what we call
miracles start in our own minds.
In Closing
The Power of Love
‘Wher e ther e is gr eat love, ther e are always miracles.’
WILLA  CATHER
There’ s one other thing that I want to mention in regard to healing, and I
think it deserves a chapter of its own, such is its power to heal body and
mind. It’ s love. Love nurtures the soul.
Aaron was so terribly stressed. He was struggling financially . He wasn’ t
getting on so well with his boss at work. The recent pay rise he’d expected
hadn’ t come through. Every day was like a nightmare for him. He just
couldn’ t shake the constant feeling of anxiety , fear and dread. Then,
completely unexpectedly , the woman he’d secretly been in love with
declared her love for him. In an instant, all of Aaron’ s problems
disappeared.
Of course, the situations still existed. But Aaron’ s experience  of them
drastically changed. The anxiety , fear and dread dissolved overnight.
Love shifts our perception of things. That’ s where the miracle  occurs –
inside us. Love reaches inside us and stirs something, the soul perhaps. It
makes life seem dif ferent, lighter , brighter .
My research into the mind–bo dy connection has convinced me that
emotional pain can play a role in many illnesses and may even be at the root
of some of them. Where it does, love can play a role in our healing.
The most obvious place to experience love is in relationships.
Relationships are food for the soul. They’re the foundation for our
experience of life. Without them, life would have less meaning. But, of
course, although  we tend to think this refers only to romantic relationships,
we can love in all sorts of relationships. Parents love their children, friends
love each other , family members  love each other , people love the animals in
their lives. All that’ s different is the style of love and the way it’ s expressed.
In Aikido and the Harmony of Natur e, Mitsug i Saotom e, founder of the
Aikido Schools of Ueshiba, writes,
If you wer e alone in the Universe with no one to
talk to, no one with whom to shar e the beauty of the
stars, to laugh with, to touch, what would be your
purpose in life? It is other life, it is love, which gives
your life meaning… W e must discover the joy of
each other , the joy of challenge, the joy of gr owth.
I believe that our main purpose in life, if there’ s such a thing, is to deepen
our expe rience of love. Many people, in their final days, reflect on what
was most important in their lives. Most say that it was the quality of their
relationships – the time they spent with their loved ones. Everything else
was just detail.
And as we experience love, we also experience healing of mind,
emotions and body . I’m not suggesting that all we need is relationships to
cure ourselves of serious illnesses. But love – real love – will change our
experience of them. And then many of the things that mattered before won’ t
seem to matter as much. We’ll discover for ourselves what is really
important.
Stress, which accelerates disease  of mind and body , fades and is replaced
with gratitude and a deep reverence for all forms of life. And from that
space, if there’ s anything practical that we need to do to facilitate any
physical healing, we’re perfect ly placed to do it. We have more energy,
vibrancy and motivation at our fingertips than ever before.
Love enhances us. It makes us so much more. It stretches us. We become
more. We become the person we were always meant to be.
Sometimes, it’s our loved ones who see this ‘more’  in us and they help us
to become it and we, in turn, help them.
In his poem ‘Love’, Roy Croft writes,
I love you
Not only for what you ar e
But for what I am
When I am with you.
Of cours e, relationships, like all things, need continual attention. They need
work. How would growth occur if we were not occasionally challenged to
work at things? In the popular  advice column ‘Sweet Reason’, Molleen
Matsumura wrote,
Love is like a campfir e: it may be sparked quickly ,
and at first the kindling thr ows out a lot of heat,
but it burns out quickly . For long-lasting, steady
warmth (with delightful bursts of intense heat fr om
time to time), you must car efully tend the fir e.
The US novelist  Ursula K. Le Guin puts it another way: ‘Love doesn’ t just
sit there, like a stone, it has to be made, like bread, remade all the time,
made new .’
And there’s a skill to remaking it, which we learn through exper ience. We
learn that we have to occasionally put our own needs aside for the needs of
another . All parents know this. The welfare of the children must always
come first. In romantic relationships, as our love deepens, we put our own
needs aside so that we may contribute to the fulfilment of our loved one’s
needs. The desire to listen repla ces the need to be right. And we discover
great joy and experience deep healing in this.
I’ve learned that love is both the most complex thing imaginable and also
the simp lest: learning what we should and shouldn’ t do, what  is best and
how to deal with the emotions of our loved ones, learning to open up and
express ourselves. These things can be tricky . But when we do make the
choice that love, if it were intelligent, would make, it is, and always was, so
simple on reflection.
Only we make it complex.
We don’t need to wait to be in a romantic relationship to experience love.
It’s all around us. In fact, it’s inside us. It’s how we choose to experience
the moments of life, whichev er form they come in, that allows us to
experience love.
You can experience love in many ways. You can show kindness to a
stranger . You can smile at some one in the street. You can spend time with
an anim al. Gaze deeply into the eyes of an animal, for example, and you’ll
know exactly what I mean.
The Power  of Gratitude
‘Happiness cannot be traveled to, owned, earned, worn
or consumed. Happiness is the spiritual experience of
living every minute with love, grace and gratitude.’
DENIS  WAITLEY
A friend once told me that gratitude changed his life in 30 days. He was
depressed at the time and had been for a while. One day he decided to try a
simple exercise. Every day he would write down 50 things that he was
grateful for . He would try to go the full month doing this – 30 days.
It was hard at first, but he alway s managed to find 50 things. Sometimes
it took him all day. He’d do a bit in the morning and add to it throughout the
day, and he’d always have his list completed by the time he went to bed. As
the days passed, it got easier . After two weeks, he was feeling so much
better that he was writing 75 things a day in his gratitude list. By the end of
the month he was a dif ferent person.
And funnily enough, as is often the case when we change from the inside,
life seem s to change on the outside. It wasn’ t long before he met the woman
of his dreams and got the job he’d always hoped for .
Why not try this exercise for 30 days and see just how much of an impact
it has on your life? It might be difficult at first, if you’re struggling with
your life, but it will get easier . As the power of gratitude cause s a crack to
appear in the veil of difficulties in your life, light seems to shine  through the
crack and illuminates things. As this happens, your experience of your life
changes. And then your life changes.
Go the Extra Mile
My partner , Elizabeth, and I were once driving on the motorway between
Scotland and England. We stopped at one of the motorway service
restaurants to have breakfast. We were both a little tired because we’d left
really early in the morning and, due to being very busy in the few days
leading up to our trip, we’d not had very much sleep.
But the tirednes s left us when we encountered the woman who served us
our breakfast. She was working behind a long counter and served us our
order before we moved further along the counter to pay. She greeted us with
a warm smile and some friendly comments. Her genuinely kind and
positive attitude was like a refreshing shower .
I think she could tell that we were feeling tired because she gave us an
extra large portion of breakfast to accompany the big portion of joy, which
was just what we needed. Within a few seconds, Elizabeth and I were
feeling refreshe d, and we hadn’ t even eaten yet. It was the woman’ s
personality and kindness that refreshed us.
While we were eating, I noticed a feedback form on the table.
Highlighted was a new initiativ e being run by the restaurant: it was called
‘Go that Extra Mile’. The form gave the opportunity for customers to
comment if a staff member had gone that extra mile in providing good
service. We had just experienced great service, so we filled out the form.
We had to includ e the staff mem ber’s name and the time and date, but we
hadn’ t noticed the woman’ s name, so on our way out we went back to the
counter and tried to read her name from her badge. The proble m was that
the restaurant was filling up and she was quite busy. She frequently had her
back to us so we couldn’ t catch her name. Now I have to admit we thought
of just leaving because it felt a little out of our comfort zones to be standing
alongside a queue of hungry people.
We were aware that some customers thought we were trying to jump the
queue. But, in life, love often stretches us and presents us with opportunities
to burst out of our comfort zone. We either act on these oppor tunities and
grow a bit more, or we walk away and wait for another opportunity .
So, seizing the opportunity , I shouted across to the woman and asked her
name. I told her that I was filling out the feedback form and that we were
really grateful for the way she’d helped us feel when we’d arrived earlier .
Right then, her face just glowed. Her smile stretched almost the full width
of her face. I suddenly felt inspired to point out the form to some of the
customers in the queue too. I said, ‘Doesn’ t she have a lovely smile? What a
great way to be served… with a smile!’  They were now all smiling.
Then, as fortune  would have it, the woman’ s manager appeared. I was on
a roll now and had no intention of stopping. I related what I’d written on the
form to the manager, right in front of the woman and the customers. The
manager ’s smile suddenly broke through too. And none of the customers
seemed to care that I was holdin g up the queue. This was a little moment of
magic and everyone was participating in it.
The manager said it was a great pleasure to receive some positive
feedback. Apparently , we’d been the first (I don’t know when the initiative
had started). She said that all they had ever received was complaints. It was
really special to receive positive  feedback, she said, and especia lly in such a
personal way .
I’m sure that many customers had been pleased with their service in the
past but had not commented. Isn’t it funny how most people reserve their
feedback until they have someth ing negative to say? How many people do
you know who send a card to a restaurant when they’ve had a nice meal,
just to say thank s? But how many people complain when a meal  didn’ t meet
their expectations?
In the absence of some form of positive feedback, people don’t realize
what a great job they’re doing  or what a gift their job is to others. We
deprive them of knowing this. I think it’ s up to us to tell them.
Too often, things are changed to suit the minority because those who
complain make a big fuss. I think it’s about time we started to show more
gratitude in the world. Let’s make a fuss about the good things. Let
kindness have the loudest voice  so that things change for the better . I feel
that we could make a huge difference to others’  lives, and our own, by
going that extra mile to say or do something really nice for others. Don’ t
wait until something bothers you before you of fer feedback.
And have you ever noticed how good it makes you feel when you do
something nice for another person? That’ s because kindne ss has side
effects. I like that there can be positive side effects and not just the negative
ones we associate with drugs. I wrote about these positive ones in my book
The Five Side Effects of Kindness . For info, the side effects are that
kindness makes you happier , is good for your heart, slows ageing, improves
relationships and it’ s contagious.
On that contagious note, every nice thing you say or do makes a
difference. Just like a lily pad on a pond rises because of a wave, so each act
of kindness makes a wave in society , however seemingly small, and it
spreads out and affects many more people than the person (or people) you
just helped.
Pinging Kindness
‘Love cur es people – both the ones who
give it and the ones who r eceive it.’
KARL  MENNINGER
I love to ‘ping’  kindness. I might be walking down a busy street and when I
see someone who looks sad I imagine pinging a little ball of kindness
towards them. I visualize it flyin g through the air and landing on them. For
effect, I usually flick my finger as if I’m flicking the ball of kindness
towards them.
I get quite creati ve at times. Usually I give the ball of kindness a colour –
whichever colou r I’m inspired by at the time. I also ping whatever quality I
feel the person needs. So, sometimes, instead of kindness, I might ping
happiness and at other times I might ping fulfilment, or love, or joy or
forgiveness. I look at the person and just ping the first quality that pops into
my mind.
Sometimes I ping more than a little ball. Sometimes I have some fun and
imagine stretchi ng it out and have it reach several people at once (who says
visualization is only to be applied to healing the body?) Sometimes I
imagine breaking a large ball of kindness into loads of little fragments and
showering peop le with them. Other times, I send a ball rolling down the
street and watch it blow through a whole line of people.
And a funny thing sometimes happens. When I ping something, people
sometimes look towards me and smile. I like to think there was an exchange
between us at those times and that the person did actually receive
something that was helpful to them.
But it’s always helpful to me too. You get back what you give out, as they
say. When it comes to love and kindness, the more you give, the more you
seem to have to give. In Romeo and Juliet , Shakespeare wrote,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the mor e I give to thee,
The mor e I have, for both ar e infinite.
I really believe  that much spiritual and emotional healing, and often
physical too, occurs as we tap into the capabilities we have to love. The
more love we can consciously  spread in the world, the more we heal
ourselves. The word ‘heal’  comes from the Old English word haelen , which
means ‘to make whole’. When we give love, we make ourselves more
whole.
Change Yourself and You Change the World
‘If you think something is missing in
your life, it’ s probably you.’
DR ROBER T HOLDEN
I’ve often spoken about the similarity between people and tuning forks.
When we strike a tuning fork, other things begin to vibrate. When we’re in
a bad mood, just like a tuning fork, we inspire a gloomy mood  around us.
People start to act as we’re acting. The same, of course, happens when we
feel happy. Then we inspire happiness around us. In a sense, we’re
contagious, but I’m not speaking here of contagion of viruses or bacteria,
but contagion of emotion.
Behaviour is contagious too. In fact, one of the most contagious
behaviours is kindness. Kind acts inspire kindness in others. Thus, as we
make changes in ourselves that mean we become more loving,
compassionate or kind, we frequently inspire similar change s in others,
even if it’ s just a little sometimes.
We need n’t do big things to change the world. It’s the small things we do
in lar ge numbers that matter most.
In relation to peace, His Holiness the Dalai Lama said,
Responsibility does not only lie with the leaders of our
countries or with those who have been appointed or elected
to do a particular job. It lies with each of us individually .
Peace, for example, starts within each one of us. When we
have inner peace, we can be at peace with those ar ound us.
And so it is with peace too. As we become more at peace with those around
us, we inspire more peace around us.
It’s OK to Suffer
I’ve noticed that one thing that distances people from peace, happiness or
contentment is the word ‘should’. We think that we should do this or that, or
that we should have done something different. Or, more painfu lly, that we
should be something different. But I think that we start to feel more
happiness and peace, and experience more healing, when we accept
ourselves – when we say , ‘It’s OK to be me!’
If you’r e suffering right now, that’s OK. Don’ t torture yourself by
thinking you shouldn’ t be. If you’re not happy right now, don’t beat
yourself up by convincing yourself that you should be happy . I say this
because people who read self-help material often think that they’re not
enlightened enough, loving enough, forgiving enough or peaceful enough
and, especially if they get sick, they assume they’re doing something
wrong. Then they criticize every negative thing they do and, even worse,
they beat themselves up for every negative thought. But it’s OK to be how
you are, to be who you are. Somet imes, we just need to lighten up, for our
own sake.
My dear friend Stephen Mulhearn, a shamanic teacher who owns a
retreat centre called Lendrick Lodge in Brig o’ Turk in Scotland, has a great
sense of humour . He often makes light of the way we beat ourselves up like
this. He had me in stitches of laughter once when he talked of a friend who
was working hard on a new nutritious diet. Stephen told me that his friend
had shaken his head and said, in a deadly serious and grave voice, as if
confessing to a murder , ‘My only vice is milk.’
The way Stephen described all this to me was just so funny . He has that
talent. But it got me thinking about how we’re our own worst critic. In fact,
other people don’t need to criticize us. We do a good enoug h job of it
ourselves.
But it’s when we start telling ourselves, ‘I am willing to love and accept
myself, just as I am. I don’t need to be perfect, or healed, or enlightened
right now; I just need to be me today ,’ that we start to move towards
wholeness. This is what you might call a greater love for ourselves. It’s a
space from which inner peace grows.
Hermann Hesse, winner of the 1946 Nobel Prize for Literature, wrote,
You know quite well, deep within you, that ther e is only a
single magic, a single power , a single salvation… and that is
called loving. W ell, then, love your suffering. Do not r esist it,
do not flee fr om it. It is your aversion that hurts, nothing else.
When we make  peace with who we are, we begin to love ourselves. And
from this space of not runnin g away from ourselves, healing can be
profound.
At the end of the day, love in any form, for ourselves and for others, is
powerful medici ne. Therefore, I’d like to end this part of the book with an
inspiring little exchange. I could n’t find a source for it, but I’m grateful to
the author:
‘A wise physician said to me, “I’ve been practising medicine for 30 years
and I’ve prescribed many thing s. But in the long run I’ve learned that for
most of what ails the human creature, the best medicine is love.”
“What if it doesn’ t work?” I asked.
“Double the dose,” he replied.’
I think that about says it all!
A–Z of Visualizations
‘I am enough of an artist to draw fr eely
upon my imagination. Imagination is mor e
important than knowledge. Knowledge is
limited. Imagination encir cles the world.’
ALBER T EINSTEIN
This section lists common ailme nts and diseases and suggests visualizations
that can be used for them, many  of which are based on examples that have
been shared with me at talks and workshops.
For some condit ions there’ s just one visualization, but for others there are
two or more suggestions. This is to cater for some of the different ways in
which we like to imagine things. A visual image that might feel good for
one person may not feel so good for another .
Many of the visualizations are interchangeable or can be adapted for
other conditions. So, if you suffer from something that isn’t on the list, scan
through and see if there’ s another kind of visualization you think you could
apply to your own situation. You can even borrow any elements that you
can use, or make up a visualization of your own.
In fact, the visualizations here may best be used as guidelines. I’d suggest
that you try to create your own – something that has greater meaning for
you and how you perceive an illness or disease – or adapt these so that
injuries, disease s, cells and other parts of the body are represented the way
you ‘see’  them.
You’ll notice that some diseases and conditions are sometimes described
symbolically , such as bacteria or viruses as black dots or inflammations as
inflated balloons . It doesn’ t matter whether you know what something looks
like anatomically or not; symbolic images often feel like a better mental
representation for people.
You’ll also notice that some visualizations are very similar and repetitive,
and many are variations upon a theme. However , I’ve presented  them as an
A–Z list so you can dip into any condition and pick up a visualization
without having to cross-refer too much to other pages.
And as before, visualization isn’t something to be done instead of taking
and acting on medical advice. It’s something we do in addition to medical
advice. As huma ns, we tend to think, so visualization gives us something to
think about , a direc tion to point the mind in. It’s a way to target your
thinking in a positive way .
Just make sure that you don’t get stressed while visualizing. If you do,
then stop. Maybe there’ s a different representation you could use, one that
feels lighter and easier , or perha ps relaxation or meditation would be better
for you.
Many people visualize on behalf of other people, like a form of prayer ,
either by just concentrating upon them or while placing their hands upon
the person. Some therapists guide clients through visualizations. There are
many creative ways to use visualization.
Certainly , resear ch is now showing that the mind is a powerful tool and if
we direct it in specific ways then we can exert quite considerable effects on
the body . Who would have believed that just believing something could
drastically alter brain chemistry , or that imagining something could change
brain structure or improve the way muscles work; or even that we could, in
effect, make immune cells go left instead of right?
For all we can say, visualizations of healing might in the future  prove to
be one of the most powerful untapped resources we can imagine. By
directing our mind, we may be activating pathways to health in our body
that haven’ t yet been considered.
And as you know by now, use the three rules of mental practice as you do
any of these visualizations:
Rule 1: Repetition
Rule 2: Repetition
Rule 3: Repetition
Acne
Acne is caused by a blockage in the oil-secreting glands in the skin, which
is usually caused by too much oil (sebum) being secreted. This leads to pus
being trapped inside or blackheads forming.
Version 1
Imagine that there’ s a valve that controls the oil-secreting gland s of the part
of the body where the acne is present (you can picture the gland in any way
you want, even as a hosepipe). Now turn the valve down and watch the
flow of oil reduce. Reduce it as much as you wish , to whatever level you
feel is appropriate for your skin.
Then imagine being underneat h the pus or blackhead so that you’re
looking up at it. Take an imaginary suction hose and suck the pus or black
stuff out. Feel the power of the suction and listen to the slurping sound.
Clear the pore completely until it looks totally clean. Imagine the skin
reforming exactly as it needs to.
Version 2
Imagine using a ‘dissolving gel’ (any colour you want) and rub or spray it
into a spot. Imagine that it’s a magical gel that only dissolves spots and
leaves perfectly healthy skin underneath.
Imagine the spot dissolve. Imagine it shrink, smaller and small er until it
disappears completely . Hear it fizzle as it does so, as if it were melting.
Then move on to the next spot. If there’ s any residue left when a spot is
dissolved, use an imaginary vacuum cleaner and just suck it up. Take some
pride in your cleaning so that there’ s absolutely no trace of the spot left,
only beautiful, healthy skin.
Version 3
Just as the photos of models in magazines are digitally airbrushed to
remove blemishes, imagine that you’re airbrushing your skin. Imagine
zooming in to each area and use a mental ‘eraser ’ tool (like a photo-editing
computer software eraser tool) to erase spots and scars.
Imagine the sensation of rubbing or gently erasing the spot or scar,
restoring your skin to just the way you want it to be – blemish-free.
As a variation of this, scan a photo of your face into your computer (if
you have one) and actually use editing software to airbrush your skin. But
as you do so, state firmly that there’s a link between what you’r e doing and
neurons in your brain. This is key. State that mirror neurons are now
activating pathways in the brain to bring you, in reality , what you’re
‘picturing’.
Ageing
To slow down the ageing process:
Imagine going into your brain and seeing a dial that has ‘agein g speed’
written on it. Note the level that the dial is set to.
Now turn it backwards to slow down the ageing speed to whate ver level
you wish. Now imagine yourself acting as if you were several years
younger . Imagine what you would do. Imagine how your body  is moving,
as your body is now feeling much younger .
AIDS
See HIV .
Allergies
Aller gies occur where the immune system is overly sensitive
(hypersensitive) to certain substances (aller gens). For instance, a
hypersensitivity to pollen is hay fever .
Imagine that your immune system is made up of hundreds of little cells.
You might even imagine them as little people. Imagine an allergen (e.g.
pollen) enter and notice how the cells react. You might imagine them as
overly sensitive or hyperactive – for example, when they spot an allergen
and they all speed towards it.
So, just say, ‘Stop.’  Imagine that the cells suddenly stop and turn to face
you. Tell them that you totally appreciate the great work they do, but that
this allergen is OK. It’s harmles s. Ask them to let it pass. Expla in that from
now on, they can even be friends with this aller gen. It’ s safe.
Now imagine them shaking hands with the allergen; imagine some of
them hugging it. Recognize that they’re friends from now on.
Anger
Version 1
Imagine anger as a large ball of fizzling light. Picture it as like a sparkler or
other firework and let it be any colour you feel is appropriate.
Imagine a dial that represents the anger level and notice the level it’s set
to. Now turn it down to the level you want (zero, presumably?) Watch the
light shrink smaller and smaller and smaller until it completely disappears
with a tiny ‘pop’.
Take a big deep breath and let it out slowly . Do this three times.
Version 2
A powerful version of this is to imagine some of the things that anger you
and then do the above visualization. Place the fizzling light inside the scene
that you’re imagining. This way, you symbolically reduce the anger you
feel about each thing, so if the situation arises again in the future , you won’ t
feel angry . You may need to do this several times (10–20) in a row to
neutralize your feelings about some situations, but it’ll be worth it.
If a person is the focus of your anger , once you’ve ‘popped’  your anger ,
imagine saying something to them that reflects your new state – perhaps
even ‘I for give you.’
Version 3
Imagine all the anger in you as being contained inside a press ure cooker .
See it swirling around in you.
Now open a valve and let the pressure out. Hear it hissing and feel the
pressure inside you dropping until the hissing has stopped and the anger has
disappeared.
Version 4
This version is about reprogramming some of your brain circuits.
Imagine the thing (or person) that angers you. Get the thought really clear
in your head. Once you can feel anger or irritation, break into a silly dance,
one that makes you smile loudly. Your brain will form a connection
between the thing that angers you and a lighter feeling.
To stren gthen the connections, now think of the thing that angers you
again and, once again, break into your silly dance. You may have to do this
about 10–20 times in a row on two or three occasions.
Anxiety
Imagine an anxiety dial inside your brain. At one end it says ‘Calm’ and at
the other it says ‘Anxious’. Take note of its setting.
If you’re feeling a little anxiou s, just imagine slowly turning the dial
towards Calm. As you do so, take deep, steady breaths. Do this often in
order to train your brain.
Arrhythmia (Palpitations)
An arrhythmia is an irregularity in the normal beating of the heart. There
are different types, but the most common is palpitations, to which this entry
refers.
Version 1
Imagine your heart and imagine  little pink hearts with angel wings on them
(to represent love), with the words ‘Normal regular heartbeat’  written on
them. Watch the little pink hearts float gently down onto your heart.
Imagine the rhythm of the heart return to normal.
Version 2
Imagine the timing system of the heart. Perhaps you imagine it like a clock
mechanism or a metronome, for example. Make some adjustments until it’s
working perfectly . You might even conjure up some special tools.
Take great care and attention as you fix the timing, and even give all the
bits and pieces a really good clean and polish, restoring the entire workings
of your heart to perfection. Imagine the ‘ticktock’  of the clock in a
beautiful-sounding, perfect rhythm.
Arthritis (Rheumatoid or  Osteo-)
Arthritis is characterized by damage to the joint cartilage and to lack of
fluid between the joints. Pain and inflammation typically arise as bone rubs
against bone.
Version 1
Imagine holding a big syringe or an oilcan full of frictionless, everlasting
oily fluid. Imagine it as either clear or coloured (it’s up to you – whatever
feels best).
Now imagine squirting it into the joint. Imagine the viscous fluid seep
into the joint and see the pieces of cartilage move apart. As a variation, you
might even imag ine tiny oily atoms sliding out of the syringe or can, having
great fun sliding into the joint.
Now imagine the oiled joint move freely and effortlessly . Next, imagine
yourself doing the things you’ll be able to do with a healed, painless joint.
Version 2
Imagine mechan ical diggers driving up to the joint. They have special
cutting tools to cut away any excess bone that was rubbing together , to
create a space.
Now imagine the diggers erecting girders to keep the space there so that
the bones can’ t rub together again.
Now imagine that another digger drives up with its bucket full of magical
everlasting lubricating fluid. Imagine it pour the fluid into the joint and see
it fill the gap.
Asthma
Asthma is characterized by occasional constriction of the airways, which
restricts breathing.
Imagine the inside of one of your airways; it’s like being insid e a small
tunnel. Now imagine teams of little workers gently pushing the inside of the
tubes and making them wider . Then see them adding magical strengthening
rings made of light to help support the new expanded size and keep the
tubes from constricting below a particular size.
Ather oscler osis
Atherosclerosis is often called ‘hardening of the arteries’. The walls of the
arteries become thickened with scar tissue and cholesterol, and calcium
deposits eventually build up. This can restrict blood flow through the
arteries.
Version 1
Imagine walking through the arteries with a steam cleaner or some cleaner
that shoots soft laser light. Aim the cleaner at the hardened deposits and
imagine them being blown clean of f the walls of the arteries.
Imagine the walls of the arteries now as soft and red/pink. Tell them you
love them and thank them for all the great work they do in pumping blood
and nutrients around your body , for keeping you healthy . Collect up all
these deposits that were removed from the walls. You can imagine using a
brush or some suction device. Put all the debris in bin bags and imagine
removing them from the body .
Version 2
Arteries are supposed to be flexible, like a flexible piece of rubber . With
atherosclerosis, the ‘tubing’  becomes hard and inflexible. So, imagine the
cells that form the walls of your arteries as rows of soft rubber bricks, but
some are much harder , discoloured, misshapen and cracked.
Remove the hard and damaged  bricks from the wall one at a time and
replace them with soft rubbery bricks. With each section you refit, imagine
that the section becomes really flexible. See it effortlessly bend and flex. Do
this until the whole artery is ef fortlessly flexible.
Athlete’ s Foot
Athlete’ s foot is characterized by dry , itchy skin on the feet and toes.
Imagine the skin cells. You might think of them as like flaky , hardened
cells that are cracked and separated from each other – like photos you may
have seen of the bed of a river or sea that has dried up.
First, imagine vacuuming up little particles of fungus (athlete’ s foot is
caused by infec tion with the tinea species of fungus). Picture them in any
way that you wish, for instance, like little balls of moss.
Then start to moisturize the cells, one by one, using a magical
moisturizer that also dissolves any stray bits of fungus. As it soaks in,
imagine each cell change shape,  bending and stretching out, like the cracks
in the riverbed getting smaller as the riverbed reforms whole. Imagine the
cracks disappear as the cells join up with each other .
Autoimmune Conditions
Autoimmune conditions – e.g. type 1 diabetes, lupus, rheumat oid arthritis
and multiple sclerosis – occur as the immune system attacks parts of the
body . For example, in diabetes, the immune system attacks beta cells of the
pancreas.
The following visualization is focused on reducing the sensitivity of the
immune system to the body . The visualization is similar to the ‘Aller gies’
visualization because there are biological similarities between some
autoimmune conditions and how the immune system reacts to an allergen in
someone who’ s aller gic to it.
Imagine that your immune system is made up of hundreds of little cells.
You might even imagine them as little people. Imagine the affected region
of the body and imagine how the cells are acting. Are they attack ing healthy
cells? If so, just say , ‘Stop.’
Imagine them suddenly stop and turn to face you. Tell them that you
totally appreciat e the great work they do, but that this is part of the body .
Imagine that the chief cell is wearing glasses and takes them off and wipes
them clean (or perhaps swaps for new contact lenses) and suddenly realizes
that you’re correct.
Now imagine the immune cells making friends with the body’ s cells. See
them hit it off. Maybe they enjoy some dancing together , or imagine some
other way of establishing that there’ s no more attacking going on here.
Blood Pr essur e: High Blood Pr essur e (Hypertension)
Imagine a balloon as a mental representation of your blood pressure, with
its level of inflation as representative of your blood pressure.  Simply let
some air out of the balloon through a valve, or even by untying it.
Imagine the comical whooshing and rasping sounds the balloon makes as
the air rushes out of it. Imagi ne it getting smaller and smaller until it
reaches a size that represents healthy blood pressure. Close the valve or
retie the balloon.
Sit comfortably and take at least three deep, comfortable breaths.
Blood Pr essur e: Low Blood Pr essur e (Hypotension)
For low blood pressure, you can do the opposite of the above visualization.
Inflate the balloon to a healthy pressure instead of deflating it.
Bronchitis
With bronchitis, the bronchi (tubes in the lungs that air passes through) are
inflamed and produce mucus.
Imagine the inside of the bronchial tubes. Imagine using a suction hose or
vacuum cleaner and suck out the mucus. If the bronchitis is a result of
smoking, then also suck out any little flecks of black residue that are
peppered throughout the walls, which symbolize residue from smoking.
After you’ve sucked up the mucus and cleaned the walls, imagine
spraying them with a cool, magical healing liquid. As it’s absorbed into the
walls, imagine that the inflammation reduces to zero and the walls return to
a healthy pink colour .
Imagine a soothing air that you breathe in that calms the bronchi.
Broken Bones
These two visualizations can be used once the bone has been set by a
doctor . When a bone has been set, there’ s a microscopic gap between the
two ends, where new bone material begins to grow .
Version 1
Imagine the two ends of the fracture and imagine teams of construction
workers repairi ng it. Imagine them inside it, building scaffolding and
constructing hundreds of tiny, silky fibres of new bone that zig-zag back
and forth and connect the two ends, forming a 3D net of bone material
between the two ends. As more and more fibres are added, imagine the net
becomes dense r and denser with new fibres until the workers have
completely healed the fracture.
Version 2
This version is a bit more fun and might be preferred by children.
Imagine the two ends of the fracture. Now imagine yourself with powers
like Spider -Man  (or you can imagine that it’s actually Spider -Man doing
this), where you can shoot a web, only it’s a web of silky bone material.
Stand at one side of the fracture and fire a web strand to the other side.
Once it sticks, connect the bit on your Spidey wrist to the end you’re
standing on, so the two ends are joined by your web. But this is no ordinary
web. After a little while it hardens and turns to bone.
Fire hundreds of strands of web between the two ends of the fracture
until they’re completely fused together . You can have some fun doing this.
See yourself swing from one side to the other so you can fire some web
from both ends. Imagine the web hardening until it’ s super strong.
Burns
Imagine a spray of magical cooling gel that sprays a fine cool mist over the
burn. Imagine being undernea th the burn, at the level where cells are
undamaged. Now imagine new cells forming and replacing damaged ones,
working your way up until you reach the surface and have replaced all the
damaged cells with healthy new ones.
Cancer
I’ve included more visualization s for cancer than for most other conditions
because it’s such a widespread disease and manifests itself in different ways
in the body .
In addition to the following visualizations, you might take some
inspiration from  the cancer visualizations described in the ‘True Stories of
Successful Visualizations’  chapter .
General visualizations for cancer
Typically , people imagine tumours shrinking. To make the shrinking
happen, some people imagine the tumour(s) being eaten by immune cells;
some imagine it’s by the action of chemotherapy drugs, which they imagine
to be like Pac-Men or piranha fish. Others imagine it’s through being
melted by radiation (from radiotherapy) or by a proton beam.
Others imagine healing light shining on the tumour(s); still others
imagine placing  crystals around them and imagine healing rays from the
crystals melting them. Some people imagine tumours like ice or snowballs
and imagine them melting, before mopping up the melt and disposing of it
outside the body .
Rather than imagining tumours, some people prefer to imagine the actual
cancer cells being destroyed, shrunk or melted, which they imagine
happening in any of the above ways.
In each case, people imagine the tumour(s) shrinking smaller and smaller
and smaller , until it (they) have disappeared completely .
The following are variations on the above theme.
Version 1
When imagining the immune system, some people like to get quite clear in
their intention and so they imag ine immune cells being created and moving
out of the bone marrow before seeking out and engulfing or destroying
cancer cells. They imagine the shape of the immune cells and how they
move, and precisely how they engulf or destroy the cancer cells.
You don’t need to know exactly how it works, but simply have a clear
mental represen tation of your own – something that clear ly indicates
precisely what you’re intending. Some people do prefer to get some clarity
on how it works, however . For this reason, I’ve placed some visualization
resources on my website: www .drdavidhamilton.com/howtovisualize .
If you want to add a little bit of lightness, while the tumour(s) is melting
you could imagine it saying, ‘I’m melting! Melting!’  like the Wicked Witch
in The Wizard of Oz. You might even wave your arms and shiver your body
as you act out the melting process (if no one is around to see you having
this fun). It’ s a bit like a victory dance.
Version 2
Imagine cells in a cancerous part of the body . Imagine that some of them
are lovely , healthy pink cells but some are discoloured and covered in
slime, or are of f-colour and sickly-looking. These represent the cancer cells.
Now take an imaginary brush and some special cleaning fluid  and start
cleaning these cells, one at a time, until each one is gleaming and restored
to a normal healthy colour .
Or, if you prefer , imagine holding a laser and burn all the cancer cells
away . Imagine leaving all healthy cells intact. Imagine sweeping up any
residue, or suck it up with a suction hose, and dispose of it outside of the
body .
Version 3
Some people prefer to see the cancer as part of them and thus they treat it
with love and affection instead of attacking it. So, imagine sitting down
with the cancer cells, hugging them and telling them that you love them (if
cancer were conscious, it wouldn’ t know it was hurting you. It would think
it was helping). Imagine the cells saying that they love you too. Then tell
them that you have to let them  go now. Imagine them leaving your body
with big smiles on their faces, waving goodbye to you as they leave.
Version 4
The following visualization involves visualizing DNA. The TP53 gene is a
‘tumour suppressor gene’  and produces a protein known as p53, which is
regarded as the ‘guardian of the genome’  and is sometimes even called ‘the
guardian angel gene’. It plays a key role in preventing tumour formation.
Imagine the TP53 gene in any way you want, perhaps as some kind of
guardian or guardian angel. Imagine that the reason cancer is present is
because either the guardian has been missing or injured, or some other
reason you might imagine.
So, now imagine  the guardian returning in a blaze of glory , or if it’s been
injured, imagine  nursing it back  to health by giving it medicine. Imagine it
become stronge r and healthy . Imagine the DNA  as the wings of the
guardian angel and imagine them  flexing as a sign of health, with ripples of
light running their full length.
Imagine the guardian now flying through the body , destroying cancer
cells in its wake . You might imagine it asking (or ordering) the cancer cells
to leave (they do know , after all, that the guardian is in charge) or you might
imagine the guardian shining coloured rays that destroy the cancer cells.
You might even imagine the cancer cells shrinking smaller and smaller until
they disappear with a ‘pop’  (death of cells is actually known as apoptosis…
a-pop-tosis).
Candida
Candida is infection with the candida species of yeast fungus and often
manifests as candidiasis (thrush) or in the vagina. It’s often noticed in
immunocompromised people.
Imagine walking  around the fungal area with a suction hose or a vacuum
cleaner and sucking up all of the fungus. Try to feel the force of the suction
and imagine its sound.
Alternatively , you could use the ‘Infections’  visualization. If you want to
boost your immune system too, you could also use the ‘Immune Boost’
visualization.
Cellulite
Imagine the cells in the fatty cellulite areas. Imagine that they’re like rows
of fatty , lardy , jelly bricks.
Use an imaginary suction hose or a vacuum cleaner to suck up the
cellulite cells. Imagine the force of the suction vibrating the hose as some of
the cells resist the suction, and imagine the slurping sound as the fat is
sucked up into the bag. And when the cells are sucked up or dissolved,
imagine that there’ s only tight, healthy-looking skin left.
Alternatively , imagine loads of little fat-eating Pac-Men, piranh a fish or
cellulite-loving rabbits eating up the cellulite and leaving the skin looking
beautiful and healthy .
Chickenpox
Chickenpox is a skin infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus.
In addition to the technique described at the end of Chapter 6, which is
focused on reducing the itch, the following visualization is focused on
making the spots disappear faster .
Version 1
Imagine holding a bottle of magical dissolving fluid (any colour that feels
good for you) and squirting it into a spot. Imagine it as cool, and soaking
right into the spot.
Now imagine the spot dissolving right before your eyes, as if the fluid
were an acid, but one that only dissolves chickenpox and leaves all other
skin alone. Imagine the spot shrinking and disappearing with a ‘pop’.
In your imagination, do this for each spot in turn. Alternatively , before
you begin your visualization, declare that what you imagine for one spot
applies to all the spots.
Version 2
Imagine talking to your spots and asking them to leave. Tell them you love
them and that you appreciate they like your body so much that they have
visited. But explain that you have to ask them to leave, and then bid them a
fond farewell. Then imagine the spots, or the individual cells, detaching
themselves from your body , one by one, and flying away into the distance.
Imagine them waving back at you as they leave.
Alternatively , use the ‘V iruses’  visualization.
For chickenpox scars
Scars are fibres of tissue.
Imagine cutting the fibres one at a time. As each cut is made, hear the
fibre twang.
Once the fibres have gone, imagine using a special paint that paints on
new layers of skin. As each layer of paint is applied, imagine it forming a
layer of perfectly formed, healthy skin cells.
Imagine adding more and more layers of healthy skin cells until you can
imagine perfectly healthy skin.
Chlamydia
Chlamydia is a sexually transmitted disease that’s caused by infection of the
urethra (men) or cervix (women) with the chlamydia trachomatus bacteria.
Imagine spraying a magical blue healing gel throughout the area that’s
infected. Imagin e the soothing gel soaking in and imagine the cooling
sensation. As the gel soaks in, imagine any inflammation reducing and any
redness returning to a healthy pink colour .
Alternatively , you could use the ‘Infections’  visualization.
Chronic Fatigue Syndr ome
See ME .
Colds (and Flu)
The common cold is mostly due to infection by the rhinovirus (as opposed
to the flu, which is infection with the influenza virus). It usually causes a
sore throat, blocked nose and mild fever .
Version 1
Imagine the cold or flu as hund reds of bubbles floating in a room or cave
that symbolically represents your body .
Imagine poppin g the bubbles one at a time. Imagine the ‘pop’  sound as
each one pops. Imagine moppin g up the residue that falls onto the ground
from the bubble s and wring it out into a mop bucket. Then imagine taking
the bucket out of the body and disposing of it.
Version 2
Imagine a suction machine and imagine moving through your blocked
sinuses and sucking up all the mucous. Then imagine talking to the cells in
your sinus areas. Thank them for the great job they do in keeping you
healthy . Explain  that they don’t need to produce so much mucous now as
the cold is leaving. They just need to produce what they need to keep you
healthy . Imagine  them slowing their production of mucous to healthy levels.
Then imagine emptying the mucous machine outside of the body .
Next, use a different machine, one that sprays cooling, healing fluid.
Now imagine spraying the fluid throughout your throat and any infected
areas. Imagine a cooling sensation.
Alternatively , use the ‘Immune Boost’  visualization or the ‘Infections’  or
‘Viruses’  visuali zations. Even though the common cold is a viral infection,
the ‘Infections’  visualization is often more appropriate because people don’t
generally think of the common  cold as a virus. And, ultimately , it’s your
mental representation that matte rs. If you wish, you could also use the ‘Sore
Throat’  visualization.
Cuts
Version 1
Imagine yourself inside the cut and see the two sides standing apart, like the
walls of a canyon.
Imagine using threads made of light to stitch them together , from the
bottom of the canyon to the top.
With each stitch, imagine pulling the two sides together . Imagine them
fusing perfectly as the two sides form new cells. If there’ s anything in the
cut that doesn’ t belong, imagine  cleaning it away . Imagine the sides coming
together so seamlessly that they create a perfect join and you can’t even see
where the cut had been.
Version 2
Imagine talking to the cut in a kindly manner . Imagine lovingly  stroking its
insides (touch generates growth hormones, which are required for
regeneration). Imagine that the two sides of the cut love each other and no
longer wish to be separated (maybe they – or you – have had an argument
and that’s why they’re apart). See them reach out and lovingly embrace
each other . You could even do this while listening to some romantic or
inspirational music.
Cystic Fibr osis
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that affects the mucus glands of the
lungs, liver , pancreas and intestines, and causes thick mucus to be produced.
This leads the airways to become clogged and the build-up can cause severe
bronchitis and pneumonia.
In addition to the following, you can do the ‘Bronchitis’  visualization
(minus the reference to flecks of smoking residue) or the ‘Pneumonia’
visualization.
Version 1
Cystic fibrosis arises out of a mutation in the CFTR gene. Imagi ne CFTR as
a little characte r that’s tired or hurt. Imagine a cord connecting it to the
DNA.
Nurse it back to life again. Give it medicine and nutrients; give it hugs
and show it great care, compass ion and attention. Imagine it grow stronger ,
and give of f a glow of light.
Version 2 (for mucous)
Imagine a suction machine and imagine moving through areas filled with
mucous and imagine sucking up all the mucous. Then imagine talking to the
cells in these areas. Thank them  for the great job they do in keeping you
healthy . Explain that they don’t need to produce so much mucous now.
Imagine emptying the mucous machine outside of the body .
Version 3
Imagine writing a new genetic program to compensate for the genetic
defect, instructing the DNA  to find another way of maintaining  health. Just
as if one engine in an aeroplane is faulty the others can compensate and
bring the plane home safely , so if one gene is defective, imagine that the
body has an ability to use a different genetic program that will allow you to
remain healthy , with greatly reduced symptoms.
Imagine the program as a ball of light (in any colour that feels good for
you) and imagine placing it into the DNA. Imagine the colour rippling
throughout the entire length of the DNA  and imagine the DNA  saying,
‘Instructions received. Thank you.’
Cystitis
Cystitis is a bacterial infection of the bladder and urethra. Use the
‘Infections’  visualization. Also, to help tackle the burning sensation:
Imagine inside the bladder . See the cells as red and swollen.
Now imagine you have buckets of magical blue cooling fluid. It’s thick
and gloopy and feels really cold to the touch.
Now rub the fluid onto the cells one at a time and watch them  cool and
the redness return to a healthy pink colour .
Depr ession
Imagine a ball of soft green, pink or white light in the centre of your body ,
or imagine it like a candle flame. It represents your happiness. Note its size.
If you imagine a light, imagine a dial or dimmer switch and turn it up. If
you imagine a candle flame, imagine the wick growing thicker . As this
happens, imagine the light becoming brighter . Affirm that the increase in
size and brightness of the light is a symbol – a representation – of your
inner strength, resilience and happiness.
As an extension (only if you feel you’d like to add more to your
visualization), you might even imagine the light becoming so bright that it
expands throughout your body . Imagine it flowing through your
bloodstream, lighting up your blood vessels, your heart, your brain and all
your other organs. Imagine it lighting up your muscles and imagine energy
and strength emanating from them.
Imagine yourse lf surrounded by this powerful light and affirm that
‘Every day, in every way, I am getting better and better ,’ which is the
affirmation taught by Émile Coué.
Diabetes
Diabetes comes in two main types: type 1 and type 2. Type 1 diabetes is an
autoimmune condition where the immune system destroys insulin-
producing beta cells in the pancreas, resulting in high levels of blood sugar .
Type 2 diabetes is a result of insulin resistance or reduced insulin
sensitivity , whic h also results in high blood sugar . Type 2 is more common
in overweight adults.
For T ype 1
See Autoimmune Conditions.
In addition, imagine flooding the pancreas with a green healing light (green
symbolizes regeneration). Imagine any damaged beta cells bathed in the
light and imagine them regenerating.
For T ype 2
First, some research suggests that in many cases, dietary intervention can
reverse type 2 diabetes.
In terms  of what seems to be going on, some studies have sugg ested that
the reduced insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetes is due to the insulin
receptor on cell surfaces. So, for this visualization, imagine that the receptor
has been asleep and you’re waking it up.
Imagine the receptor in any way you wish. Imagine it’s asleep. Imagine
giving it a little shake and asking it to wake up. Imagine it come to and
enjoy a yawn and a stretch. Tell it that you appreciate the great job that it’s
always done, that you’re happy it had a little sleep, but that it’s time to wake
up now. Imagin e it looking refreshed and thanking you for waking it up,
and that it’ s very excited to get on with things.
Diarrhoea
Diarrhoea often  results from some kind of infection; therefore use the
‘Infections’  visualization.
Emphysema
Emphysema is characterized by a destruction of the walls of the alveoli in
the lungs, which limits breathing.
Imagine that you have a bag of new alveoli cells and start filling up the
holes in the walls using these cells. Fit the new cells perfec tly into the
holes, as if you are putting bricks on a wall (only these brick s are more
gelatinous than house bricks). Imagine the new cells squeezing into all the
gaps so that all the holes are filled with new cells.
As you fill the holes, imagine air flowing into and out of the lungs
without any being lost at all through the holes because all the holes are now
filled.
Endometriosis
Endometriosis is growth of endometrium (the tissue that lines the uterus)
outside or beyond the uterus: on the ovaries, fallopian tubes and the tissue
that lines the pelvis. The deposits under go periodi c bleeding in synch with
normal menstru ation and this can lead to inflammation. In ovarian
endometriosis, cysts can also develop. They’re known as ‘chocolate cysts’
because of their dark brown colour .
Imagine cleaning the ovaries, fallopian tubes and pelvic tissue
(whichever are affected) using a suction hose or a vacuum cleaner , or
anything else that you might use to clean with (even a little rabbit that likes
the taste of ‘chocolate’  cysts), so that the deposits are cleaned right off.
Imagine cleanin g until the areas  are looking clean and healthy (and happy –
feel free to see them with smiling faces).
Enteritis (Gastr oenteritis)
Enteritis is often called gastroenteritis, although the stomach isn’t really
involved. The same visualization can be used, however . Enteritis is
inflammation of the small intestine that’s usually caused by infection with a
virus or bacteria. Inflammation is the body’ s general response to an
infection.
Swelling is a consequence of fluid build-up in a region. Infla mmatory
substances in the body (part of the immune response to infection) also cause
a dilation of narrow blood vessels in tissues, which increases the amount of
blood in the region. This is why inflamed regions are usually red.
You could use the ‘Immune Boost’  or ‘Infections’  visualizations.
Alternatively , for inflammation, imagine reducing the swelling and redness
in the inflamed  region. Imagine sucking the fluid away using a suction
machine and, as this occurs, imagine the redness changing to a healthy pink.
Imagine blowing  cool air into the region and imagine all the cells breathing
a sigh of relief  as they feel refreshed in the cool air. You might even
imagine them smiling.
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is the name given to any of a number of recurring brain seizures.
Imagine being inside the brain. Imagine little agitated characters looking
on, alert, jumpy and a little afraid. These are character repres entations of
epilepsy and they’re on alert because they don’ t actually live here.
Tell them  there’ s no need to be afraid. Tell them they’re safe, and that
you love them. Everything is OK. They can relax. Tell them that you’ll help
them to get home. Imagine a big bus and imagine seeing all the epilepsy
characters boarding the bus. As it drives away into the distance, imagine
them all waving at the window .
Flu (and Colds)
Flu is caused by an infection with the influenza virus (as opposed to the
common cold, which is infection with rhinovirus). It usually results in fever ,
sore throat, cough, and aches and pains over the body .
Use the ‘Colds’  visualization, the ‘Infections’  visualization, the ‘Viruses’
visualization or the ‘Sore Throat’  visualization.
Gastr oenteritis
See Enteritis .
Glands (Swollen Glands)
Version 1
Imagine the swollen glands like inflated balloons. Notice how inflated they
are.
Now imagine letting some of the air out. Imagine the whooshing or
rasping sound as the air rushes out (it’s fun to listen to it like this and it will
make you smile) and the balloons deflate. Imagine each balloon gets
smaller and smaller until it’ s completely deflated.
To make the visualization lighter , imagine each balloon shrieking, ‘I’m
melting! Meltin g!’ like the Wicked Witch in The Wizard of Oz, when
Dorothy acciden tally threw water on her. If no one is around to see you (or
if they are and you just don’t care), wave your hands in the air and make
melting actions.
Version 2
Imagine a bustling nightspot called ‘Glands’  that’s absolutely  full to the
brim with people. It’s at burst ing point. There are people crammed up
against the wall and the bar is several layers deep with people. Now
imagine the bouncers starting to clear people out as it’s too full. As loads of
revellers leave ‘Glands’, imagin e that the place settles down, is much more
calm, has much less pressure and has plenty of space at the bar to enjoy a
relaxing drink.
Alternatively , use the ‘Immune Boost’  or ‘Infections’  visualizations.
Gonorrhoea
Gonorrhoea is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases. It’s
usually characte rized by a burning sensation while urinating and sometimes
a dischar ge.
Imagine applying a magical blue soothing gel onto each of the cells at the
site of pain or infection. Imagin e the cells at first as red and inflamed, but
once you apply the gel, imagine them breathing a sigh of relief as their
swelling reduces and they return to normal.
Alternatively , use the ‘Infections’  visualization.
Haemorrhoids
Haemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or rectum.
Imagine the haemorrhoids like balloons with air in them. Imagi ne letting
the air rush out. Imagine the whooshing or rasping sound as the air pours
out (it’s fun to listen to it like this, and it might make you smile, especially
as this is a sound quite familiar to that area!) and the balloons deflate, one at
a time. Imagine  that the ballo ons get smaller and smaller until they’re
completely deflated.
Hay Fever
Use the ‘Aller gies’ visualization . Alternatively (or in addition), you could
try the following:
Imagine walking  through a field of freshly cut grass where there’ s loads
of pollen. However , you feel great. You have absolutely no symptoms of
hay fever . You breathe normally and your nose and eyes feel fresh. Imagine
doing a victory dance to celebr ate (or do an actual victory dance). It can
help to do the visualization (and dance) to happy , uplifting music.
Heart Disease
Heart disease is a collective term for a number of different cardiovascular
diseases.
Imagine some of the diseased cells like shrivelled prunes, or some other
representation of a diseased cell. One by one, imagine giving each cell a
spoonful of medicine. Imagine it smiling and its cheeks flush. Now imagine
dipping a sponge in some ‘healing fluid’  and imagine spongi ng the cell,
gently cleansing it. As you do so, imagine it gaining more substance, the
prune-like wrink les popping out, and its colour changing to a healthy pink.
Give each cell a hug and thank  it for the wonderful job it does in keeping
you healthy . Then move on to the next cell and repeat.
Hepatitis
Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver through infection with any of the
hepatitis viruses: A, B or C (D and E also exist but are less common).
Use the ‘Infections’  visualization or the ‘Viruses’  visualization. Although
hepatitis is a viral infection, we often tend to think of infections as bacterial.
As this is what we culturally think, it’s therefore sufficient  to use the
‘Infections’  visualization.
Additionally or alternatively , try the ‘Heart Disease’  visualization. It’s a
general visualization for damaged or diseased cells.
HIV
HIV is infection with human immunodeficiency virus. The relationship
between HIV and AIDS is often misunderstood. AIDS (acquired immune
deficiency syndrome) is the term normally used when a person’ s immune
cell count (specifically their blood CD4 lymphocytes) drops  beneath a
certain level and they suffer from certain ‘opportunistic’  infections. Many
people infected with HIV are never diagnosed with AIDS. So, there isn’t an
AIDS virus. There’ s an HIV virus, which lowers the immune system to a
level where opportunistic infec tions occur , and a diagnosis of AIDS is
therefore made.
The severity of an HIV infection is down to the fact that the virus docks
onto receptors on immune cells (CD4 T lymphocytes, which are often
called T-cells). The immune cells are then destroyed. But before  the T-cell is
destroyed, more virus is replicated and released into the bloodstream. Thus,
the virus multiplies and the T-cell count reduces.
Use the ‘V iruses’  or ‘Immune Boost’  visualizations, or both.
Alternatively , since the virus needs to dock onto receptors on the immune
cells, imagine the immune cells having some fun by constantly changing
the shape of their receptors in a completely random pattern, so that the HIV
virus can’t dock on. After a few unsuccessful attempts, imagine the virus
giving up and self-destructing.
Hypertension
See Blood Pr essur e.
Hypotension
See Blood Pr essur e.
Immune System (Immune Boost)
Immune cells begin their life in your bone marrow . Imagine a site inside the
bone marrow where immune cells are being produced. Imagine the cells in
any way you wish. Create a mental representation that feels good to you. If
you wish, you can even  imagin e a manufacturing process and a dial where
you can speed it up.
Imagine new immune cells moving out into the bloodstream and joining
with existing immune cells. Imagine them moving towards and destroying
whatever they need to destroy (infections, viruses, cancer cells, etc).
Imagine the immune cells being  very intelligent in that they only target
what they need to destroy and leave everything else healthy and intact.
Infections
Many condition s are caused by infections, so this visualization can be
applied to any of them.
Version 1
Imagine the infection in any way you wish, in a representation that feels
right to you. Imagine using a suction machine – a vacuum cleaner or some
other device – and completely suck the infection up. You might even
imagine the sound the machine makes as it sucks up the infecti on. Get into
all the nooks and crannies. Render the area completely free of infection.
Imagine the area clean and tidy , and all the cells or tissues looking healthy .
Version 2
Imagine the infection in any way you wish, in a representation that feels
right to you. Imagine using a power hose or some other form  of power
cleaner and hose down the infec ted areas. Imagine the force of the jet as it
powers towards the infection. Imagine the infection being blown clean out
of the area but imagine it being caught in a big net. Imagine collecting all
the infec tive agents (viruses, bacteria, fungi or pathogens) in the net and
then dispose of them outside of the body .
Version 3
Some people also apply this visualization to cancer , flushing out cancer
cells instead of infections .
Imagine a shower of crystal-clear healing light (or any particula r colour that
resonates with you) that pours in through the top of your head  and flushes
infections away .
Imagine the light spreading through each of your body parts – from the
top of your head , through your shoulders and arms, chest, back, mid region,
down through your legs and out through the soles of your feet. Imagine the
infection flushing out of the soles of the feet, just as water seems to flush
dirt from the body when you take a shower .
To protect from infection
To protect yourself from infect ion if people around you are sick, imagine
yourself surrounded by a large bubble. Decide that the bubble is some kind
of energy barrier that doesn’ t allow anything into your body that can cause
harm. Imagine the bubble as any thickness you want. You can even imagine
it colou red, composed of multiple layers, rotating (spinning), or as any
other representation that feels protective to you and which would form a
barrier between you and infective agents.
Inflammation
Swelling is a consequence of fluid build-up in a region. Inflammatory
substances in the body (part of the immune response to infection) also cause
a dilation of narrow blood vessels in tissues, which increases the amount of
blood in the region. This is why inflamed regions are usually red.
Imagine reducing the swelling  and redness in the inflamed region.
Imagine sucking the fluid away using a suction machine and, as this occurs,
imagine the redness changing to a healthy pink. Imagine blow ing cool air
into the region and imagine all the cells breathing a sigh of relief as they
feel refreshed in the cool air . You might even imagine them smiling.
Insomnia
Version 1
This isn’ t exactly a visualization – it’ s mor e a technique .
As you lie in bed, take some comfortable breaths and with each out-breath
imagine all of your muscles relaxing and sinking into the bed. As you do
this, mentally say the word ‘sleep’  very slowly , as in
‘Ssssllleeeeeeeeeeeeppp.’
Version 2
This is also a technique rather than a visualization. Often, the mind is so
busy that a person struggles to sleep, or thoughts are dominated by worry
about not gettin g to sleep. This technique gives the mind somet hing else to
focus on. It can sometimes help.
Think of as many things (and people) that you’re grateful for in your life.
Think of why you’re grateful to particular people. What have they
contributed to your life? Allow  feelings of gratitude to replace feelings of
worry or anxiety .
Irritable Bowel Syndr ome (IBS)
IBS is characterized by diarrhoea, abdominal pain and bloating.
Imagine your bowel and give it some TLC. Treat it the way you’d treat
someone who was feeling irrita ble. Irritable people sometimes  need some
TLC so give your bowel some TLC, so that it doesn’ t feel irritable
anymore. Give it a hug, gently stroke it and tell it you apprecia te the great
job it does in keeping you healthy .
Imagine your bowel with a face and as you give it some TLC, imagine its
facial expression changing from irritable to calm. Imagine it smiling at you.
Lupus
Lupus (systemic  lupus erythematosus, or SLE) is an autoimmune condition.
With lupus, the immune system  can attack almost any organ or tissue, but
it’s often known for its attack on the skin – many people with lupus have a
bright red rash on their face.
You might derive some inspirati on from the Lupus visualization given in
Chapter 14 , ‘True Stories of Successful Visualizations’.
Alternatively , use the ‘Autoimmune’  visualization.
Malaria
Malaria is caused by infection with the plasmodium genus of protozoa from
the bite of an infected mosquito. The parasite invades and destroys red
blood cells. It causes recurring (cyclic) fever and chills, sweating, fatigue
and even jaundice and anaemia.
Use either the ‘Protozoa’  visualization or the ‘Infections’  visual ization to
imagine neutralizing the infection. You could also, or alternatively , use the
‘Immune Boost’  visualization.
ME (Myalgic Encephalomyelitis)/CFS (Chr onic Fatigue
Syndr ome)
ME (also referred to as Chronic  Fatigue Syndrome or CFS) is characterized
by chronic mental and physical exhaustion.
You might derive some inspiration from the ME/CFS visualization given
in Chapter 14 , ‘True Stories of Successful Visualizations’.
Alternatively , imagine a ball of light inside the body that represents your
energy level or strength. Notice its size and colour and how bright it appears
to you. Imagine  a dial and turn up the brightness of the light. Imagine it
getting brighter and brighter . As it gets brighter , imagine the light expand
outwards so that it’ s lighting up your entire body .
Imagine it expanding through all of your muscles, filling them with
energy. Imagine it travelling through the bloodstream, delivering energy to
each and every area of the body. Finish with an imaginary victory dance.
Imagine yourself doing your dance in celebration of your return to strength.
Alternatively , some theories of ME say that it’s caused by a build-up of
toxins in the body. Therefore, you could also use the ‘Toxins’  visualization
to rid the body of toxins.
Measles
Measles is caused by the measles virus, and is characterize d by fever
followed by a red rash.
Use the ‘Viruses’  visualization or the ‘Immune Boost’. Alternatively , you
could also, or alternatively , do a visualization specifically for the skin rash:
Imagine each cell in the rash as red. Now imagine using a sponge and
dipping it in some kind of healing fluid. Imagine gently sponging the red
rash cells and as you do so, imagine each cell returning to its usual healthy
colour .
Meningitis
Meningitis is inflammation of the meninges, which are the protective
membranes covering the nerves  of the central nervous system. Two main
types of meningitis exist – viral and bacterial. Viral is the less serious of the
two.
Use the ‘Infecti ons’ visualizatio n or the ‘Immune Boost’  and focus the
attention of your visualization on the meninges.
Multiple Scler osis (MS)
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease where the immune system
destroys the myelin sheath, a protective white fatty substance that coats
axons (arms of neurons). Therefore, communication down axons is af fected.
Use the ‘Autoimmune’  visualiza tion. In addition, you could also imagine
re-growing the myelin sheath. Here are two suggested visualizations for
that:
Version 1
Imagine the inside of your bone marrow . Imagine it as a room, cave or
cavern full of stem cells resting. Stem cells are cells that can morph into
almost any cell type. Imagine them in any way you want. Communicate
with them and ask them to become myelin sheath cells. Imagine them
excitedly say ‘Y es!’ They were just waiting for instructions.
See them move out of the bone marrow and travel to the damaged
sections of the sheath. Imagine the stem cells morphing into myelin sheath
cells and sitting seamlessly alongside healthy cells. As the new cells take
their place, imagine the damage fully repaired.
Version 2
Imagine a nerve with areas of its protective coating missing. Imagine this in
any way that feels right for you. For example, you could imagine it as an
exposed copper wire from which parts of the insulating plastic has worn off,
or as a tree with areas of bark missing, or in some other way .
Imagine repairin g the nerve, adding myelin all the way along the nerve.
So, you might imagine recoatin g the copper wire or putting insulating tape
on it, or re-growing bark on the tree that represents the axon.
Muscle Tears
Imagine sewing  the muscle tear(s) together . Imagine you have a needle
made of light (so that it doesn’ t cause any pain) and your thread is new
muscle fibres. Imagine the criss-cross motion as you bring the tear(s)
together , sewing up the tear so well that it’ s no longer even visible.
Obesity
The weight visualizations will work best alongside diet and lifestyle
changes. Use the ‘Weight Loss ’ visualization or you can try one of the
following:
Version 1
Imagine fat cells melting like blocks of ice. Imagine each cell totally melt
into a pool of liquid. Then imagine mopping up any residue and disposing
of it outside of the body .
Version 2
A chemi cal known as leptin produces an ‘I’m full’ signal in the brain, but
there’ s scientific  evidence to suggest that with obesity there can be some
resistance to the signal, hence people don’t feel as full as others do after
eating, and this can increase the risk of overeating. In some people, the OB
gene (the gene that produces leptin) may actually be faulty , which might
predispose them to eat more.
Therefore, imag ine the OB gene as a little character that’s tired or hurt.
Imagine a cord connecting it to the DNA.
Nurse it back to life again. Give it medicine and nutrients and hugs, and
show it great care, compassion and attention. Imagine it growing stronger ,
and giving off a glow of light. As it grows stronger , imagine fat evaporating
from the places you want it to.
Version 3
If your body has become desensitized to leptin, and is therefore less able to
hear the ‘I’m full’  call, try the following:
Normally , leptin  travels to the hypothalamus in the brain, where it docks
onto leptin recep tors. So, for this visualization, we’re going to assume that
the leptin receptor can’ t hear the leptin calling.
Imagine a leptin molecule (in any way you wish) moving about inside the
hypothalamus of the brain, shouting ‘I’m full!’  but not being heard. The
receptor is asleep. Imagine the receptor as a shape on the surface of the cell.
Receptors are like parking bays of different shapes and sizes that are
‘receptive’  to vehicles of different shapes and sizes, thus the leptin receptor
is ‘receptive’  to the leptin.
Imagine giving the receptor a shake to wake it up. Imagine it waking,
stretching and looking fully refreshed. Imagine it immediately  reacting to
hearing the leptin calling out ‘I’m full!’  by changing its shape  so that the
leptin can fit into it. Imagine the leptin moves closer and the two hug or
shake hands before the leptin disappears into the shape and into the cell.
It’s a bit of a fun visualization, but that can be a good thing.
Pain
Version 1
The following visualization is similar to some used by hypnot herapists or
dentists to significantly reduce pain.
Imagine a dial with a reading on it, something like 1–10 or some other
measure. Imagine that the setting on the dial represents the level of your
current or your typical level of pain. Imagine turning the dial down, all the
way down to a very low level or even zero.
You can do this when you’re in pain, but you can also practise it ‘offline’.
In other words, you can practise the visualization and thus train your brain
to reduce the setting any time you’re in pain.
Version 2
Pain signals travel along nerve s from the painful area of the body to the
brain. Pain actually happen in the brain. It just feels as though it’s at the site
of an injury .
Imagine a pain signal like an electrical pulse that’s moving from the site
of pain towards the brain. The signal has to transmit between nerves by
jumping across a tiny gap known as a synapse.
Imagine placing  a piece of insulating polystyrene in the gap so that the
pain signal is absorbed by the polystyrene and just fizzles out, therefore not
reaching the ‘pain’  regions of the brain. Only , this is a special type of
polystyrene because it only blocks pain signals. It’s completely invisible to
all other signals and so all other signals pass freely between the brain and
the body .
Palpitations
See Arrhythmia.
Parkinson’ s Disease
Parkinson’ s disease is characterized by muscle tremors and rigidity, mostly
due to reduced production and release of dopamine in the basal ganglia of
the brain (of which the striatum is part). It’s an area that connects with the
movement control area (motor area).
Version 1
Imagine brain cells that are supposed to be producing dopamine  as made of
a spongy material. Imagine them squeezing themselves and imagine
dopamine squirt ing out like bubbles, just as bubbles would squirt out of a
sponge if you were to squeeze the sponge underwater .
Imagine the bubbles of dopamine moving to movement-control regions
of the brain, and/or other areas that they need to go to. Imagine them being
absorbed into these regions and imagine yourself moving more easily .
Version 2
Imagine a dopamine factory inside the basal ganglia region of the brain
with a big sign above it readin g ‘Dopamine Factory’. Imagine addressing
the workers and instructing them that they need to increase production of
dopamine. Imagine them cheering, as they enjoy making dopamine.
Imagine teams of construction workers making dopamine (imagine
dopamine in any way that you wish) and loading it into big truck s where it’s
then taken out and released into the brain. Imagine the trucks driving to a
part of the brain with a sign saying ‘Movement Control Area’. Imagine the
trucks emptying the dopamine molecules into the region. As the dopamine
molecules fill up the region, imagine moving your muscles more easily .
Alternatively , you might take inspiration from the stroke visualizations
described in Chapter 7 .
Peptic Ulcer
Peptic ulcers are caused by the bacterium helicobacter pylori and are
characterized by abdominal pain, especially if fatty food is eaten.
Use the ‘Infections’  visualization or the ‘Immune Boost’  visualization.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is inflammation of the lungs that’s usually caused by a bacterial
infection. Use the ‘Infections’  visualization or the ‘Immune Boost’
visualization.
Alternatively (or additionally) , imagine reducing the swelling and
redness in the lungs. Imagine sucking the fluid away using a suction
machine and, as this occurs, imagine the redness changing to a healthy pink.
Imagine blowing cool air into the region and imagine all the cells
breathing a sigh of relief as they feel refreshed in the cool air. You might
even imagine them smiling. Imagine air effortlessly flowing through your
lungs as you breathe.
Protozoa Infections
Protozoa are single-celled organisms that can infect the body . They act like
parasites becaus e they take over cells that they infect. For instance, the
plasmodium species of protozoa  that produce malaria infect and take over
red blood cells.
Imagine talking  to the parasites and asking them to leave your body .
They actually prefer to be somewhere else and have only taken up a
temporary resid ence in your body. Offer help to get them to where they
want to go. Imagine a big bus that will take them there. Imagine all the
protozoa getting on the bus, and as it drives off into the distance , away from
your body , imagine the protozoa waving goodbye from the windows.
To prevent further infections
Imagine surrounding your cells with a protective bubble that prevents any
parasites from entering, so they just bounce off the cells and then self-
destruct after a few failed attempts.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that causes the immune
system to attack the joints.
Use the ‘Autoimmune’  visualiza tion. In addition, or alternatively , use the
‘Arthritis’  visualization.
Scars
Scars are fibres of tissue.
Imagine cutting the fibres, one at a time. As each cut is made, hear the
fibre twang. Once the fibres have gone, imagine using a special paint that
paints on new layers of skin. As each layer of paint is applied, imagine it
forming a layer of perfectly formed, healthy skin cells.
Imagine adding more and more layers of healthy skin cells until you can
imagine perfectly healthy skin.
Sciatica
Sciatica is caused by compression of the sciatic nerve.
Version 1
Imagine the compression of the sciatic nerve in any way you wish. For
example, you might imagine it as something that’s been squashed and is yet
to regain its shape.
Now imagine that you’re pumping it up, like you would a flat tyre.
Imagine it regaining its full shape, thus healthy signals are now easily able
to transmit along the nerve, and pain is eradicated.
Version 2
Imagine that the sciatic nerve  has been stretched – like a cord that’s
supposed to run straight but is being stretched around an object and thus
becomes tight, for instance.
Imagine gently moving it off the object. Then imagine the tension
completely removed in the nerve as it returns to being straight again.
Self-Esteem
Use the ‘Depression’  visualization.
In addition, my book I Heart Me: The Science of Self-Love  is a great
resource, packe d with useful exercises and insights to help develop a
healthy level of self-esteem.
Sinusitis
Sinusitis is caused by bacterial infection with streptococcus pneumoniae or
haemophilus influenzae and leads to inflammation of the paranasal sinuses,
which are air-filled spaces within the bones of the face. This can cause a
blockage of the small opening from the sinus to the nose, which means that
mucus can’t drain freely . The resulting pressure build-up causes  pain in the
face or head.
Version 1
Start with the ‘Inflammation’  visualization. After imagining the
inflammation cleared, imagine the airways to be completely open and free.
Imagine air and fluid flowing freely .
Version 2
Imagine the pressure you feel in the sinuses represented as an inflated
balloon, with its level of inflation symbolizing how much pressu re you feel.
Now imagine letting the air out of it. Imagine the whooshing  or rasping
sound as the air rushes out. Imagine breathing effortlessly and the fluids
flowing freely in the sinuses again.
Alternatively , use the ‘Infections’  visualization.
Sleep Pr oblems
See Insomnia.
Sore Throat
See Thr oat.
Spinal Cord Injury
With some spinal cord injuries, the spinal cord is severed, but with most
injuries it remains intact but damage leads to loss of movement. The
following visualizations can be done for either condition, as they’re
symbolic of re-establishing communication.
Use the visualization described  in the scientific studies on stroke, in
Chapter 7 . In addition, you could try one of the following:
Version 1
If you’ve ever seen a fibre optic cable, you’ll know that it consists of
hundreds of individual fibre optics. Imagine the spinal cord injury as a
break in some of these individual ‘wires’  – a break in the nerves of the
spinal cord.
Now imagine reconnecting the nerves, one by one, with magic thread.
Tie it around one end and then thread it up to the other end of the nerve and
pull the two ends together until they connect.
As each individual nerve is repaired, imagine a pulse of electricity , in any
colour you like, flow across the newly repaired section. Then imagine a
pulse flow from your brain to any part of your body (whichev er part that
you intuitively feel is now connected). As you repair more and more nerves,
imagine pulses going to every part of your body .
As a pulse move s to each region  of the body , imagine moving that part of
the body in the way you want.
Version 2
Alternatively , instead of using magic thread, imagine sprinkling some
magical fertilize r (nerve growth factor) on the end of severed or damaged
nerves. Imagine the nerve beginning to grow , like leaves and branches grow
on plants. Imagine it growing towards the nerve on the other end of the
break. If you need to, add some more growth factor until the two ends
connect and the break is healed. Then see the pulse of electricity , as in
Version 1, as you imagine moving your body freely .
Version 3
Imagine inside the bone marrow . Imagine it as some kind of room, cave or
cavern full of stem cells that are resting. Communicate with them and ask
them to become spinal cord cells. Imagine them excitedly saying ‘Yes!’
They were just waiting for instructions.
Imagine them move out of the bone marrow and travel to the site of the
spinal cord injur y. Imagine the stem cells morph into spinal cord cells and
fit seam lessly alongside healthy  cells. As more and more new cells take
their place, imagine the damage to the spinal cord fully repaired and
imagine moving your body freely .
Spots
See Acne.
Stress
Version 1
Stress usually has particular triggers – that is, situations (or people) where
stress tends to arise. Imagine yourself in a trigger situation. However ,
instead of acting stressed, imagine acting in the way that you want. In
particular , imagi ne your shoulders as relaxed, your back straight, your face
and neck relaxed, and breathe. Take 5–10 breaths while holding this
visualization.
Do the same if you have more than one trigger situation.
Version 2
Imagine your stress as an inflated balloon, with its level of inflation as a
representation of your stress levels. Now take a deep breath and imagine
untying the balloon and letting the air out. Imagine the whooshing sound as
the air flows out of the balloon. Imagine it completely deflating.
Do this 5–10 times in a row .
Version 3
Imagine your stress represente d as a fizzling, sparking ball of energy.
Imagine a dial with the words ‘Stress Level’  written on it. Imagine the
current setting of the dial. Take a deep breath and, as you exhale, turn the
setting down on the dial, all the way to zero, until the fizzling ball of energy
shrinks so small that it disappears completely with a ‘pop’.
Do this 5–10 times in a row .
As an alternative version of this, instead of using a fizzling ball of
energy, imagine  the situations that you feel stressed about as framed
images. Turn the dial to zero as you shrink these images so small that they
disappear with a pop. This tells your brain that the situations are no longer
stressful for you.
Stroke
A stroke is the term used to describe a rapid loss of brain function due to a
loss of blood supply . It’s often accompanied by loss of use of one side of
the body .
Use the visualization described  in the scientific studies on stroke, in
Chapter 7 . In addition, you could try the following:
Imagine that the inside of the damaged area of the brain looks like a field
of burned-out trees and bushes. It looks as though there’ s been a forest fire
or as if an area has been deforested and all that’ s left is barren land.
Now imagine sowing new seeds. Imagine placing seeds in those brain
regions and imagine them grow into a tree (neurons). If you were to look at
a picture of a neuron online or in a medical textbook, you’d  notice the
similarities between the branches of trees and the branches of neurons!
Sow seeds and grow trees (neurons) throughout the entire region. As
more trees grow , imagine them connecting with each other . As they
connect, imagine a pulse of electricity flow between them and then to a part
of the body where movement is impaired.
Syphilis
Syphilis is a sexually transmitte d disease that’s caused by infection with the
treponema pallidum spirochete bacterium.
Use the ‘Infectio ns’ visualization . The treponema pallidum bacterium is a
spirochete (corkscrew-like) shape, so, to enhance the visualization, you
could imagine the bacteria as little spirals, like pasta.
Throat (Sor e Throat or  Throat Infection)
Use the ‘Infectio ns’ visualizatio n if you wish to tackle your sore throat by
neutralizing the infection, or use the ‘Immune Boost’  visualization. Or you
could try the following:
Imagine spraying magical ice-co ol vapour all over the red and sore area.
Imagine the cool feeling. Imagin e that the magical ice-cool vapour also acts
like an eraser . See the redness fade to a healthy pink colour and see any
swelling reduce to nothing, as if you have let air out of a balloon.
Toxins
Many substance s are toxic to the body , including mercury , cobal t, lead, rock
dust (silica), asbestos, food contaminants, pesticides, and industrial solvents
and chemicals.
This visualization can also be applied to any illness where you feel that
there’ s something in your body that you want to remove. For instance, you
could imagine flushing out cancer cells, bacteria, viruses or protozoa.
Version 1
Imagine a shower of crystal-clear healing light (or any particula r colour that
resonates with you) that pours in through the top of your head  and flushes
toxins away .
Imagine the light spreading through each of your body parts – from the
top of your head through your shoulders and arms, chest, back, mid region,
down through your legs, and out through the soles of your feet. Imagine the
toxins flushing out of the soles of the feet, just as water seems to flush dirt
from the body when you take a shower .
Imagine the light darkening as it flushes out the toxins, and continue to
visualize this until you imagine the light runs clear .
Version 2
Imagine you have a circular sieve, like the one you use to filter dirt from
stones in your garden. Imagine drawing the sieve from the top of your head
down through your body and out of your feet, capturing toxin particles
along the way. Imagine seeing the toxins in the sieve and dispose of each
load away from the body .
Version 3
Imagine the toxins as little fleck s of dust or dirt sticking to tissue and other
places througho ut your body . Imagine using a vacuum cleaner to suck up
the particles. Keep cleaning until you’ve removed all of the toxins. Empty
the vacuum bag/canister away from the body .
Tuber culosis (TB)
TB is caused by the mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria, which affects the
lungs. The bacteria are small rod-shaped organisms (which means that you
can be quite specific with your visualizations).
Use the ‘Infections’  visualization or the ‘Immune Boost’  visualization.
Alternatively , you could try one of the following:
Version 1
If you imagine that some of your cells are sick because they’ve been hurt by
the TB bacteria, you can imagine nursing them back to health, one by one.
Imagine giving them spoonful s of special nutrients that are made of
everything a cell could possibly  need and are really tasty. Imagine that the
cells smile and say ‘Mmmmmm’  as they eat each spoonful of medicine.
Imagine a healthy colour retur n to their faces and then see them grow
stronger and stronger , regaining their full health and strength.
Version 2
Imagine the inside of your bone marrow . Imagine it as a room, cave or
cavern full of stem cells resting. Stem cells are cells that can morph into
almost any cell type. Imagine them in any way you want. Communicate
with them and ask them to beco me whichever cells that TB has damaged.
Imagine them excitedly say ‘Y es!’ They were just waiting for instructions.
See them  move out of the bone marrow and travel to the area that’s
damaged by TB (e.g. the lungs). Imagine the stem cells morphing into lung
cells sitting seam lessly alongsid e healthy cells. As the new cells take their
place, imagine the damage fully repaired.
Ulcer
See Peptic Ulcer . (The ‘Peptic Ulcer ’ visualizat ion can be applied to any
type of ulcer .)
Varicose Veins
Varicose veins are overly dilated veins, mostly in the legs.
Imagine a vein as overly inflated and that it has a valve on top of it. Now
imagine slowly releasing the air from the valve. Imagine the sound of air
rushing out, as if you’ve let the air out of a balloon or an airbed. Imagine
the inflated vein shrinking back to normal. Do this for each vein.
Viruses
The following visualizations can be applied to any viral infection.
Version 1
Viruses need to dock onto receptors on cells that they infect. Usually , they
use the cell to replicate themselv es and the cell then dies. Receptors are like
parking bays of different shapes and sizes that are receptive to proteins,
hormones and other substances in the body .
As viruses approach cells to infect them, imagine the cells having some
fun by constantly changing the shape of their receptors in a completely
random pattern, so that the viruses can’t dock on. After a few unsuccessful
attempts, imagine the virus giving up and self-destructing – a bit like how a
player gets three ‘lives’  in a computer game.
For existing infected cells, use the ‘Immune Boost’  visualization,
imagining the immune cells destroying virus-infected cells and other
viruses moving around looking for cells to infect.
Version 2
Imagine talking to the viruses and thanking them for visiting. But explain
that because they’re causing harm to your body , you have to ask them to
leave. Imagine them saying that they didn’ t realize they’d been causing
harm and are very happy to leave. They know of other places far away that
they’d love to visit. Imagine them getting on a bus or train and as the
vehicle moves away into the distance, imagine them waving goodbye from
the window .
Version 3
Imagine using a computer , laptop, tablet or smartphone inside your body .
Imagine that it interfaces with your DNA. Type the words ‘Upload
universal anti-vi rus program’  (or some other title that represents a program
that can cancel any virus and can’ t be corrupted. Press ‘Enter ’.
As the program uploads, imagine a current of energy running the whole
length of your DNA. Then imagine specific ‘anti-virus genes’  switching on.
As this happens, imagine viruses being hit by bolts of energy and being
destroyed in every region of the body .
Warts and Verrucas
Warts and verru cas are small areas of roughened skin caused by the human
papilloma virus (HPV). They can be flat or raised.
You might take inspiration or guidance from one of the Verruca
visualizations described in Chapter 14, ‘True Stories of Successful
Visualizations’. Or use the ‘V iruses’  visualization.
Weight Loss
Also see Obesity .
The following visualizations will work best alongside dietary and
lifestyle changes.
Version 1
Imagine little Pac-Men or piran ha fish nibbling away at the fat that you
want to be rid of. See them really enjoying eating the fat. Watch them get
fatter and fatter . When they’re really full, imagine them leaving your body
with big satisfied smiles on their faces.
Version 2
Imagine that there’ s a little piston inside the fat on your body with a sign
above it saying ‘Fat Burn’. Imagine that it’s going up and down really
slowly . This represents the rate at which the fat is burning off you. Imagine
there’ s a little dial on the side of the piston with speed settin gs. Imagine
turning it up and imagine the little piston get faster and faster .
Now imagine a factory chimney , only it’s no ordinary chimney . It’s
burning the fat. Imagine the smoke pour out of the top of the chimney and
off into the distance, way out of your body .
Worm Infections
Worm infections are so widespread that they infect around 3 billion people,
especially in tropical and deve loping countries. Many worms  live in the
intestines, but some travel to other or gans as they mature.
Imagine a computer , laptop, tablet or Smartphone inside your body .
Imagine that it interfaces with your DNA. Type the words ‘Upload worm-
defence program’  (or some other title of your choice). Press ‘Enter .’
As the program uploads, imagine a current of energy running the whole
length of your DNA. Then imagine specific ‘anti-worm genes ’ switching
on. As this happens, imagine a light shining throughout your body (or a
sound tone) that the worms don’t like. Imagine the worms finding it so
unpleasant that they quickly leave the body .
Alternatively , use Version 2 of the ‘Viruses’  visualization, but substitute
the virues for worms.
R e f e r e n c e s
Chapter 1: The Power of Positive Thinking
For the Mayo Clinic study of optimists and pessimists, see T. Maruta et al.,
‘Optimism-pessimism assessed in the 1960s and self-reported health status
30 years later ’, Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 2002, 77(8), 748–753
For the 2004 study involving 999 Dutch men, see E.J. Giltay et al.,
‘Dispositional Optimism and All-Cause and Cardiovascular Mortality in a
Prospective Cohort of Elderly Dutch Men and Women’, Archives of
General Psychiatry , 2004, 61, 1 126–35.
For the nun study, see D.D. Danner et al., ‘Positive Emotions in Early Life
and Longevity: Findings from the Nun Study’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology , 2001, 80(5), 804–13.
For the study where volunteers were exposed to the cold or influenza
viruses, see S. Cohen et al., ‘Positive Emotional Style Predicts Resistance to
Illness After Experimental Exposure to Rhinovirus or Influenza A Virus’,
Psychosomatic Medicine , 2006, 68, 809–15.
For an article containing the study of 200 telecommunications executives,
see Peggy Rynk, ‘The Value of a Healthy Attitude: How Faith, Anger ,
Humor , and Boredom Can Affect Your Health’, Vibrant Life, March–April
2003.
For the study of 586 people finding that attitude is the best prevention
against heart disease, see D.M. Becker , ‘Positive attitude is best prevention
against heart disease’, paper presented at the American Heart Association
Annual Scientific Sessions, Anaheim, CA, 12 November 2001.
For the study of 866 heart patients and positive attitude, see B. Brummett,
‘Positive Outlook Linked to Longer Life in Heart Patients’, paper presented
at the American Psychosomatic Society , March 2003.
For the emotion al vitality study , see L.D. Kubzansky and R.C. Thurston,
‘Emotional Vitality and Incident Coronary Heart Disease: Benefits of
Healthy Psychological Functioning’, Archives of General Psychiatry , 2007,
64(12), 1393–1401.
For the ‘Hard Marriage, Hard Heart’  research, see:
T.W. Smith et al., ‘Marital Conflict Behavior and Coronary Artery
Calcification’, paper presented at the American Psychoso matic
Society 64th Annual Meeting, Denver , CO, 3 March 2006.
T.W. Smith et al., ‘Hostile Personality Traits and Coronary Artery
Calcification in Middle-Aged and Older Married Couples: Different
Effects for Self-Reports Versus Spouse Ratings’, Psychosomatic
Medicine , 2007, 69(5), 441–48.
P. Pearsall, ‘Contextual cardiology: what modern medicine can learn
from ancient Hawaiian wisdo m’, Cleveland Clinical Journal of
Medicine , 2007, 74(1), S99–S104.
For the 25-year hostility study , see J.C. Barefoot et al., ‘Hostility , CHD
Incidence, and Total Mortality: A 25-year Follow-Up study of 255
Physicians’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 1983, 45(1), 59–63.
For the paper quoting hostility as an indicator of heart disease, see R.B.
Williams et al., ‘Psychosocial Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease:
More Than One Culprit at Work’, Journal of the American Medical
Association , 2003, 290(16), 2190–92.
For the Finnish satisfaction study, see H. Koivumaa-Honkanen et al., ‘Self-
Reported Life Satisfaction and 20-Y ear Mortality in Healthy Finnish
Adults’, American Journal of Epidemiology , 2000, 152(10), 983–91.
For the ‘Money buys happiness ’ research, see E. W. Dunn et al., ‘Spending
Money on Others Promotes Happiness’, Science , 2008, 319, 1687–1688.
For the effect of attitude on ageing, see B.R. Levy et al., ‘Longevity
increased by positive self-perceptions of aging’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology , 2002, 83(2), 261–70.
For the study of positive attitude being good for blood pressure, see G.V.
Ostir et al., ‘Hypertension in Older Adults and the Role of Positive
Emotions’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 2006, 68, 727–33.
For the study linking frailty with attitude, see G.V. Ostir et al., ‘Onset of
Frailty in Older Adults and the Protective Role of Positive Affect’,
Psychology and Aging , 2004, 19(3), 402–08.
For the link between life satisfaction and longevity , see T.M. Lyyra et al.,
‘Satisfaction With Present Life Predicts Survival in Octogenarians’, The
Journals of Gerentology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences , 2006, 61(6), 319–26.
For the Posit Science Corporation study , see:
H.W. Mahncke et al., ‘Memory  enhancement in healthy older adults
using a brain plasticity-based  training program: A randomized,
controlled study’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 2006, 103(33), 12523–28.
H.W. Mahncke et al., ‘Brain plasticity and functional losses in the
aged: scientific basis for a novel intervention’, Progress in Brain
Resear ch, 2006, 157, 81–109.
For the Harvard  age study going back to 1959, see Ellen J. Langer PhD,
Mindfulness  (Da Capo Press, 1990).
For information on using the brain and reducing the risk of Alzheimer ’s, see
R.S. Wilson et al., ‘Participation in Cognitively Stimulating Activities and
Risk of Incident Alzheimer ’s Disease’, Journal of the American Medical
Association , 2002, 287(6), 742–48.
For the priming experiments, see:
J.A. Bargh et al., ‘Automaticity of social behavior: Direct effects of
trait construct and stereotype activation on action’, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology , 1996, 71(2), 230–44.
T.M. Hess et al., ‘Explicit and Implicit Stereotype Activation Effects
on Memory: Do Age and Awareness Moderate the Impact of
Priming?’, Psychology and Aging , 2004, 19(3), 495–505.
Chapter 2: The Power of Believing
The quotation from Professor Benedetti can be found in F. Benedetti,
‘Mechanisms of Placebo and Placebo-Related Effects Across Diseases and
Treatments’, Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology , 2008, 46,
33–60. This is also a good review of recent research into the placebo ef fect.
For the release of dopamine when Parkinson’ s patients receive placebos,
see:
R. de la Fuente-Fernández et al., ‘Expectation and Dopamine
Release: Mechanism of the Placebo Effect in Parkinson’ s disease’,
Science , 2001, 293(5532), 1 164–66.
R. de la Fuente- Fernández et al., ‘Dopamine release in human ventral
striatum and expectation of reward’, Behavioral Brain Resear ch,
2002, 136(2), 359–63.
The first evidence of opioid release during placebo analgesia can be found
in J.D. Levine et al., ‘The Mechanism of Placebo Analgesia’, The Lancet,
1978, 654–57.
For an account of placebo effects closely tracking the treatments with which
they’re paired, and a discussion of the similarity in brain scans while
patients receive Prozac or a placebo, see F. Benedetti et al.,
‘Neurobiological mechanisms of the placebo effect’, Journal of
Neur oscience , 2005, 25(45), 10390–402.
For the MRI brain scans of people receiving placebos and high placebo
responses, see:
J.K. Zubieta et al.,‘Placebo Effects Mediated by Endogenous Opioid
Activity on m-opioid Receptors’, Journal of Neur oscience , 2005, 25,
7754–62.
T.D. Wager et al., ‘Placebo effects on human m-opioid activity during
pain’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007,
104(26), 1 1056–61.
For some clinical trial results, visit: https://www .centerwatch.com/cwweekl
y/category/news/trial-results/  (last accessed 5 June 2018).
For the chronic fatigue syndro me study that tested acyclovir , see S.E.
Strauss et al., ‘Acyclovir Treatment of the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Lack
of Efficacy in a Placebo-Controlled Trial’, New England Journal of
Medicine , 1988, 319(26), 1692–98.
For the placebo studies on asthma, see:
T. Luparello et al., ‘Influences of Suggestion on Airway Reactivity in
Asthmatic Subjects’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 1969, XXX, 819–25.
E.R. McFadden et al.,‘The Mech anism of Action of Suggestion in the
Induction of Acute Asthma Attacks’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 1969,
XXXI, 134–43.
For the study of performance-enhancing placebos, see F. Bene detti et al.,
‘Opioid-Mediated Placebo Responses Boost Pain Endurance and Physical
Performance: Is It Doping in Sport Competitions?’  Journal of
Neur oscience , 2007, 27(44), 1 1934–39.
For the study involving the hotel-room maids, see A. J. Crum  and E. J.
Langer et al., “Mind-Set Matters: Exercise and the Placebo Effect’,
Psychological Science , 2007, 18(2), 165-171.
For the study of women’ s beliefs affecting their mathematics performance,
see I. DarNimrod and S.J. Hein e, ‘Exposure to Scientific Theories Affects
Women’ s Math Performance’, Science , 2006, 314(5798), 435.
For information on placebo responders, as well as lots of information on a
range of placebo studies, see Daniel Moerman, Meaning, Medic ine and the
‘Placebo Effect’  (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
The 1954 bleeding ulcers study was reported in Daniel Moerman’ s book.
For the study involving hidden arm pain, see F. Benedetti, ‘The opposite
effects of the opiate antagonist naloxone and the cholecystokinin antagonist
proglumide on placebo analgesia’, Pain , 1996, 64(3), 535–43.
For the dental injections given with an ‘oversell’  or ‘undersell’  message, see
S.L. Gryll and M. Katahn, ‘Situational Factors Contributing to the Placebo
Effect’, Psychopharmacology , 1978, 57(3), 253–61.
For the study on the effect of positive and negative consultatio ns, see K.B.
Thomas, ‘General practice consultations: is there any point in being
positive?’  British Medical Journal , 1987, 294, 1200–02.
For the studies of optimists and pessimists and how they respond in the
placebo ef fect, see the following:
For the pessimists study , see A.L. Geers et al.,‘Reconsidering the role
of perso nality in placebo effects: Dispositional optimism, situa tional
expectations, and the placebo response’, Journal of Psyc hosomatic
Resear ch, 2005, 58(2), 212–17.
For the optimist s study , see A.L. Geers et al., ‘Further evidence for
individual differences in placebo responding: an interact ionist
perspective’, Psychosomatic Resear ch, 2007, 62(5), 563–70.
For the conditio ned immunosuppression using cyclosporin A, see M. U.
Goebel et al., ‘Behavioral conditioning of immunosuppression is possible in
humans’, FASEB Journal , 2002, 16, 1869–73.
For Benedetti’ s conditioning of immune and growth hormone levels, see F.
Benedetti et al., ‘Conscious Expectation and Unconscious Conditioning in
Analgesic, Motor , and Hormon al Placebo/Nocebo Responses’, Journal of
Neur oscience , 2002, 23(10), 4315–23.
For the Benedetti study where Parkinson’ s patients received placebos
instead of apomorphine, see F. Benedetti et al., ‘Teaching neurons to
respond to placebos’, Journal of Physiology , 2016, 594(19), 5647–5660.
For PCD R studies and a discuss ion on how to use conditioning to boost the
placebo effect, see Jo Marchant, Cure (Canongate Books, London, 2017),
Chapter 3, ‘Pavlov’ s Power ’.
Chapter 3: Drugs Work Better If We Believe in Them
For the 2008 antidepressants analysis that found over 80 per cent placebo
effect, see I. Kirsch et al., ‘Initi al Severity and Antidepressant Benefits: A
Meta-Analysis of Data Submitted to the Food and Drug Adm inistration’,
PLOS Medicine , February 2008, 5(2), e45, 0260–68.
A number of the studies reporte d in this chapter were also cited in Daniel
Moerman’ s excellent book, cited above. I thoroughly recommend it to
anyone seeking  a fuller understanding of the placebo effect and its
implications.
For the quote from C.G. Helm an, see his chapter entitled ‘Placebos and
nocebos: the cultural constructio n of belief ’ in Understanding the Placebo
Effect in Complementary Medicine, Theory , Practice and Resear ch, ed. D.
Peters (Churchill Livingstone, 2001).
For the study of blue and pink sedatives and stimulants, see B. Blackwell et
al., ‘Dem onstration to medical students of placebo responses and non-drug
factors’, Lancet , 1972, 1(7763), 1279–82.
For the study of injections versus tablets in the USA  and Europe , see A.J. de
Craen et al., ‘Placebo effect in the acute treatment of migraine:
subcutaneous placebos are better than oral placebos’, Journal of Neur ology ,
2000, 247(3), 183–88.
For the study of Tagamet performed in France, see R. Lambert et al.,
‘Treatment of duodenal and gastric ulcer with cimetidine: A multicenter
double-blind trial’, Gastr oenter ologie Clinique et Biologique , 1977, 1(11),
855–60.
For the study in Brazil, see J.A. Salgado et al., ‘Endoscopic findings after
antacid, cimetid ine and placebo for peptic ulcer – importance of staging the
lesions’, Arquivos De Gastr oenter ologia , 1981, 18(2), 51–3. Both studies
are reported in Daniel Moerman’ s book, cited above.
The reduction in effectiveness of Tagamet once Zantac was available is
described in Damiel Moerman ’s book. It’s also mentioned in Herbert
Benson MD’ s Timeless Healing  (Scribner , 1995).
For the Universi ty of Keel aspir in study , see A. Branthwaite and P. Cooper ,
‘Analgesic effects of branding in treatment of headaches’, British Medical
Journal , 1981, 282, 1576–78.
For the suggestion that Viagra is enhanced by its name, see A.K. Vallance,
‘Something out of nothing: the placebo effect’, Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment , 2006, 12, 287–96.
For the study of four placebos being better than two in anti-ulc er trials, see
A.J. de Craen et al., ‘Placebo effect in the treatment of duodenal ulcer ’,
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology , 1999, 48(6), 853–60.
For adherence in the clofibrate trial, see Coronary Drug Project Research
Group, ‘Influenc e of Adherence to Treatment and Response of Cholesterol
on Mortality in the Coronary Drug Project’, New England Journal of
Medicine , 1980, 303(18), 1038–41.
For the real versus sham mammary ligation studies, see:
E.G. Dimond et al., ‘Compariso n of internal mammary artery ligation
and sham operation for angina pectoris’, American Journal of
Cardiology , 1960, 5, 483–86.
L.A. Cobb et al., ‘An Evaluation of Internal-Mammary-Artery
Ligation by a Double-Blind Technique’, New England Journal of
Medicine , 1959, 260(22), 1 115–18.
For the summary analysis of 53 trials comparing actual surgery with sham
surgery, see K. Wartolowska et al., ‘Use of placebo controls in the
evaluation of surgery: systematic review’, British Medical Journal , 2014,
348, g3253.
For the naproxen  study where patients either knew or didn’ t know that they
were receiving it, see J.F. Bergmann et al., ‘A randomised clinical trial of
the effect of informed consent on the analgesic activity of placebo and
naproxen in cancer pain’, Clinical Trials and Meta-Analysis , 1994, 29(1),
41–7.
For research showing that a placebo can be as good as 6–8mg of morphine,
see J.D. Levine and N.C. Gordon, ‘Influence of the method of drug
administration on analgesic response’, Natur e, 1984, 312, 755.
For research showing that diazepam doesn’ t work unless a person knows
they’re receivin g it, see F. Benedetti et al., ‘Hidden Admin istration of
Drugs’, Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics , 201 1, 90, 651–661.
The Benedetti quote,‘The existe nce of the placebo effect suggests that we
must broaden our conception of the limits of… human capability ,’ can be
found in F. Benedetti et al., ‘Neurobiological Mechanisms of the Placebo
Effect’, Journal of Neur oscience , 2005, 25(45), 10390–402.
For research showing that open-label placebos work through nonconscious
processes, see K.B. Jensen et al., ‘A Neural Mechanism for Nonconscious
Activation of Conditioned Placebo and Nocebo Responses ’, Cerebral
Cortex , 2015, 25(10), 3903–3910.
For the OLP study on IBS, see T.J. Kaptchuk et al., ‘Placebos without
Deception: A Randomized Controlled Trial in Irritable Bowel Syndrome’,
PLOS ONE , 2010, 5(12), e15591.
For the OLP study on chronic low back pain, see C. Carvalho et al., ‘Open-
label placebo treatment in chron ic low back pain: a randomize d controlled
trial’, Pain , 2016, 157(12), 2766–2772.
For the OLP study on fatigu e suffered by cancer patients, see T.W.
Hoenemeyer et al., ‘Open-Label Placebo Treatment for Cancer-Related
Fatigue: A Randomized-Controlled Clinical Trial’, Scientific Reports , 2018,
8(2784), 1–8.
Chapter 4: The Power of Plasticity
For the study of brain changes in symphony musicians, see V. Sluming et
al., ‘Voxel-Based Morphometry Reveals Increased Gray Matter Density in
Broca’ s Area in Male Symphony Orchestra Musicians’, Neur oImage , 2002,
17(3), 1613–22.
The reference to brain-map changes as blind people learn Braille can be
found in Norman Doidge MD, The Brain that Changes Itself  (Penguin,
2007).
For the study of brain changes while students were studying for exams, see
B. Draganski et al., ‘Temporal  and Spatial Dynamics of Brain Structure
Changes during Extensive Learning’, Journal of Neur oscience , 2006,
26(23), 6314–17.
For the London  taxi drivers study, see E.A. Maguire et al., ‘London Taxi
Drivers and Bus Drivers: a Structural MRI and Neuropsychological
Analysis’, Hippocampus , 2006, 16, 1091–1 101.
For the study showing brain changes in mathematicians, see K. Aydin et al.,
‘Increased Gray  Matter Density in the Parietal Cortex of Mathem aticians: A
Voxel-Based Morphometry Study’, American Journal of Neur oradiology ,
2007, 28(10), 1859–64.
For the study of the effects of meditation on the brain, see S.W. Lazar et al.,
‘Meditation experience is associated with increased cortical thickness’,
Neur oreport , 2005, 16(17), 1893–97.
The Eric Kandel quote, as well as a discussion of brain changes due to
psychotherapy , can be found in Norman Doidge’ s book, cited above.
For the study showing 15 per cent increase in hippocampal volume due to
environmental enrichment, see G. Kemperman et al., ‘Neuroplasticity in old
age: Sustained fivefold induction of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-
term environmental enrichment’, Annals of Neur ology , 2002, 52, 135–143.
See also L. Lu et al., ‘Modification of hippocampal neurogenesis and
neuroplasticity by social envir onments’, Experimental Neurology , 2003,
183(2), 600–09.
For discovery of neurogenesis in the hippocampus, see P.S. Eriksson et al.,
‘Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus’, Natur e Medicine , 1998,
4(11), 1313–17.
The identification of neurogenes is right up to our final days can be found in
the paper cited immediately above, on the discovery of neurogenesis in
adults. The scientists received permission from terminally ill patients to
inject them with a biological marker, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). When the
patients died, neurogenesis was discovered.
For a good review of neurogenesis, see P. Taupin and F.H. Gage, ‘Adult
Neurogenesis and Neural Stem Cells of the Central Nervous System in
Mammals’, Journal of Neur oscience Resear ch, 2002, 69, 745–49.
Chapter 5: The Mind Can Heal the Body
For a good description of the brain and how it changes with our thoughts
and emotions, see Joe Dispenza, Evolve Your Brain  (Health
Communications Inc., 2007).
For the research  showing that hostility slows the rate of wound healing, see
J.K. Kiecolt-Glaser et al., ‘Hostile Marital Interactions, Proin flammatory
Cytokine Production, and Wound Healing’, Archives of General Psychiatry ,
2005, 62(12), 1377–84.
For the effects of stress on grow th hormone levels and on the ‘upregulation’
and ‘downregulation’  of genes at wound sites, see S. Roy, et al., ‘Wound
Site Neutrophil Transcriptome in Response to Psychological Stress in
Young Men’, Gene Expr ession , 2005, 12(4–6), 273–87.
For social support speeding up wound healing, see C.E. Detillion et al.,
‘Social facilitati on of wound healing’, Psychoneur oendocrinology , 2004,
29(8), 1004–1 1.
Trumping our genes refers to the science of epigenetics. To learn more
about epigenetics, see Bruce Lipton, The Biology of Belief  (Mount ain of
Love/Elite Books, 2005). See also Dawson Church, The Genie in Your
Genes  (Elite Books, 2007).
For research on the effect of love and care on the growth of children, see
David R. Hamilton PhD, Why Kindness is Good for You (Hay House,
London, 2010), Chapter 10, ‘Why Babies Need Love’. See also: www .buch
arestearlyinterventionproject.or g (last accessed 23 May 2018).
For information on neurogenesi s and the suggestion that the mind interacts
with DNA  in stem cells, see Ernest L. Rossi, The Psychobiology of Gene
Expr ession  (Norton, 2002).
Chapter 6: The Power of Imagination and Observation
For the Benedetti study involving capsaicin, see F. Benedetti et al.,
‘Somatotopic Activation of Opioid Systems by Target-Directed
Expectations of Analgesia’, The Journal of Neur oscience , 1999, 19(9),
3639–48.
For the study where experimental pain was induced in fingers, see G.
Montgomery and I. Kirsch, ‘Mechanisms of Placebo Pain Reduction: An
Empirical Investigation’, Psychological Science , 1996, 7(3), 174–76.
In an email communication, I asked Fabrizio Benedetti wheth er a person
with two different ailments would get better from one of them if he or she
was given a placebo for that specific ailment (believing it to be a real drug)
but not the other . Would a person with Parkinson’ s, say, who also had a
headache and who received an anti-Parkinson’ s drug (which was really a
placebo) find the tremors reducing but not the headache, and vice versa?
Benedetti agreed that this would most likely be the case.
For the Karolinska Institute research showing that imagined movements of
fingers, toes and tongue activated brain regions that governed them, see H.
H. Ehrsson et al., ‘Imagery of Voluntary Movement of Finger s, Toes, and
Tongue Activates Corresponding Body-Part-Specific Motor
Representations’, Journal of Neur ophysiology , 2003, 90(5), 3304–16.
For the piano study, see A. Pascual-Leone et al., ‘Modulation  of muscle
responses evoked by transcranial magnetic stimulation during the
acquisition of new fine motor skills’, Journal of Neur ophysiology , 1995,
74(3), 1037–45.
For the study where volunteers’  fingers got 35 per cent stronger through
imagined training, see V.K. Ranganathan et al., ‘From mental power to
muscle power – gaining streng th by using the mind’, Neur opsychologia ,
2004, 42(7), 944–56. See also G. Yue and K.J. Cole, ‘Strength increases
from the motor program: comparison of training with maximal voluntary
and imagined muscle contractions’, Journal of Neur ophysiology , 1992,
67(5), 1 114–23.
For the study showing the differences in muscle activation depending upon
the imagined weight, see A. Guillot et al., ‘Muscular responses during
motor imagery as a function of muscle contraction types’, International
Journal of Psychophysiology , 2007, 66(1), 18–27.
For the study where the tetraplegic person opened an email with his mind,
see L.R. Hochber g et al., ‘Neur onal ensemble control of prosthetic devices
by a human with tetraplegia’, Natur e, 2006, 442, 164–71.
For research into mental walking in virtual-reality simulators, see G.
Pfurtscheller , et al., ‘Walking from thought’, Brain Resear ch, 2006,
1071(1), 145–52.
For mirror neurons research where volunteers watched hands, mouth or foot
movements, see G. Buccino et al., ‘Action observation activates premotor
and parietal areas in a somato topic manner: an fMRI study’, European
Journal of Neur oscience , 2001, 13(2), 400–04.
For the ‘Bend it like Beckham’  paper , see P. Bach and S.P Tipper, ‘Bend it
like Beckham: Embodying the Motor Skills of Famous Athletes’, Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology , 2006, 59(12), 2033–39.
For the study where volunteers increased finger strength throug h watching
training, see C.A. Porro et al., ‘Enhancement of force after action
observation: Behavioural and neurophysiological studies’,
Neur opsychologia , 2007, 45(13), 31 14–21.
For improvements gained by stroke patients through watching people
perform routine  actions, see D. Ertelt et al., ‘Action observ ation has a
positive impact on rehabilitation of motor deficits after stroke’,
Neur oImage , 2007, 36, Supplement 2, T164–73.
For activ ation of mirror neurons while watching someone playing a guitar ,
see G. Buccino et al., ‘Neural Circuits Underlying Imitation Learning of
Hand Actions: an Event-Related fMRI Study’, Neur on, 2004, 42, 323–34.
For activ ation of the brain by listening to sentences describing motion, see
G. Buccino et al., ‘Listening to action-related sentences modulates the
activity of the motor system: A combined TMS and behavioral study’,
Cognitive Brain Resear ch, 2005, 24(3), 355–63.
See also M. Tettamanti et al., ‘Listening to Action-Related Sentences
Activates Fron to-parietal Motor Circuits’, Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience , 2005, 17(2), 273–81.
For activation of tongue muscles by listening to speech, see L. Fadiga et al.,
‘Speech listening specifically modulates the excitability of tongue muscles:
a TMS study’, European Journal of Neur oscience , 2002, 15(2), 399–402.
A good review of mirror neuron research is G. Buccino et al., ‘Functions of
the Mirror Neuron System: Implications for Neurorehabilitation’, Cognitive
and Behavioural Neur ology , 2006, 19(1), 55–63.
Chapter 7: Visualization for Rehabilitation and Sports
That 122 mental practice papers had been published in 1980 but had
increased to 20,000 by 2010 was found in C. Schuster et al., ‘Best practice
for motor imagery: a systematic  literature review on motor imag ery training
elements in five dif ferent disciplines’, BMC Medicine , 201 1, 9(75), 1–35.
For the 2014 meta-analysis of stroke rehabilitation, see A.Y. Kho et al.,
‘Meta-analysis on the effect of mental imagery on motor recovery of the
hemiplegic upper extremity function’, Australian Occu pational Thera py
Journal , 2014, 61(2), 38–48.
For the universi ty of Cincinnati study that used visual imagery as part of a
study into rehabilitation after a stroke, see:
S.J. Page et al., ‘Mental Practice in Chronic Stroke: Results  of a
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial’, Stroke, 2007, 38(4), 1293–
97.
S.J. Page et al., ‘Effects of Mental Practice on Affected Limb  Use
and Function in Chronic Stroke’, Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation , 2005, 86(3), 399–402.
For the Chinese study that showed brain activation in stroke patients due to
imagery training, see H. Liu et al., ‘Mental Practice Combined with
Physical Practice to Enhance Hand Recovery in Stroke Patients’,
Behavioural Neur ology , 2014, Article ID 874416.
For use of mental imagery in rehabilitation after spinal cord injury , see S.C.
Cramer et al., ‘Effects of imag ery training after chronic, complete spinal
cord injury’, Experimental Brain Resear ch, 2007, 177(2), 233–42.
For use of mental imagery by Parkinson’ s patients, see R. Tamir et al.,
‘Integration of Motor Imagery and Physical Practice in Group Treatment
Applied to Subjects with Parkinson’ s Disease’, Neur orehabilitation and
Neural Repair , 2007, 21(1), 68–75.
For the golf chip shot visualization study , see M. Brouziy ne and C.
Molinaro, ‘Mental Imagery Combined with Physical Practice of Approach
Shots for Golf Beginners’, Perceptual and Motor Skills , 2005, 101, 203–
211.
For the handball visualization  study , see A. Azimkhani et al., ‘The
combination of mental and physical practices is better for instruction of a
new skill’, Nigde Universit y Journal of Physical Education and Sports
Sciences , 2013, 7(2), 179–187.
For the Kim studies on action observation, mental imagery and mental
representation structure applied to putting in golf, see:
T.H. Kim et al., ‘Differences in Learning Facilitatory Effect of Motor
Imagery and Action Observation of Golf Putting’, Journal of Applied
Sciences , 201 1, 11(1), 151–156.
T. Kim, et al., ‘A Systematic Investigation of the Effect of Action
Observation Training and Motor Imagery Training on the
Development of Mental Representation Structure and Skill
Performance’, Frontiers in Human Neur oscience , 2017, 11(499), 1–
13.
Chapter 8: Visualization to Enhance the Immune System
For the Achterber g research that showed increases in s-IgA  after immune
system-tar geted visualization, see M. Rider et al., ‘Effect of Immune
System Imagery on Secretory IgA’, Biofeedback and Self-Regulation , 1990,
15(4), 317–333.
For the Achterbe rg research on cell-specific imagery of the immune system,
see M. S. Rider  and J. Achterb erg, ‘Effect of Music-Assisted Imagery on
Neutrophils and Lymphocytes’, Biofeedback and Self-Regulation , 1989,
14(3), 247–257.
For the study where 20 patients with depressed WBC counts visualized
their immune systems, see V.W. Donaldson, ‘A Clinical Study of
Visualization on Depressed White Blood Cell Count in Medical Patients’,
Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback , 2000, 25(2), 1 17–128.
Chapter 9: Visualization for Cancer and Other Conditions
For the study of women with advanced breast cancer that found that quality
of life was a predictor of their response to chemotherapy and likelihood of
survival, see S.C. Fraser et al., ‘A daily diary of quality of life measurement
in advanced breast cancer trials ’, British Journal of Cancer , 1993, 67(2),
341–346.
For the 1999 study of 96 cancer patients who used visualization of their
immune systems destroying cancer cells, see L.G. Walker et al.,
‘Psychological, clinical, and pathological effects of relaxation training and
guided imagery during primary chemotherapy’, British Journal of Cancer ,
1999, 80(1/2), 262–268.
For the RCT  of 80 women who used visualization of their immune systems
destroying cancer cells, see O. Eremin et al., ‘Immuno-Modulatory Effects
of Relaxation Training and Guided Imagery in Women with Locally
Advanced Breast Cancer Undergoing Multimodality Therapy: A
randomised controlled trial’, The Br east, 2009, 18, 17–25.
For the study of women receiving surgery for breast cancer who visualized
their immune systems destroying cancer cells, see C.A. Lengacher et al.,
‘Immune Responses to Guided Imagery During Breast Cancer Treatment’,
Biological Resear ch for Nursing , 2008, 9(3), 205–214.
For the 1988, year-long study , of patients who used visualizat ion of their
immune systems destroying cancer cells, see B.L. Gruber et al., ‘Immune
System and Psychological Changes in Metastatic Cancer Patients Using
Relaxation and Guided Imagery: A Pilot Study’, Scandinavian Journal of
Behaviour Therapy , 1988, 17(1), 25–46.
For the study of 208 cancer patients who reduced cluster sympto ms through
the use of imag ery, see A. Charalambous et al., ‘Guided Imagery And
Progressive Muscle Relaxation as a Cluster of Symptoms Management
Intervention in Patients Receiving Chemotherapy: A Randomized Control
Trial’, PLOS ONE , 2016, 1 1(6), e015691 1.
For the study of 65 breast cancer patients who reduced many of their side
effects through the use of imagery , see S.F. Chen et al., ‘Effect of
Relaxation With Guided Imagery on The Physical and Psychological
Symptoms of Breast Cancer Patients Under going Chemotherapy’, Iranian
Red Cr escent Medical Journal , 2015, 17(1 1), e31277.
For the study where mental imagery helped wean patients from mechanical
ventilation, see LeeAnna Spiva et al., ‘The Effects of Guided Imagery on
Patients Being Weaned from Mechanical Ventilation’, Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine , 2015, Article ID 802865, 1–9.
For the Hong Kong study where visualization benefited patients with
COPD, see S. W.S. Louie, ‘The effects of guided imagery relaxation in
people with COPD’, Occupational Therapy International , 2004, 11(3),
145–59.
For the Alaskan study where biologically targeted imagery helped asthma
sufferers, see L.W. Freeman and D. Welton, ‘Effects of Imag ery, Critical
Thinking, and Asthma Educatio n on Symptoms and Mood State in Adult
Asthma Patients: A Pilot Study’, Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,
2005, 1 1(1), 57–68.
For the use of visualization in total knee replacement surgery, see A.F.
Jacobsen et al.,‘Guided Imagery for Total Knee Replacement: A
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Study’, Alternative and
Complementary Medicine , 2016, 22(7), 563–575.
For the use of guided imager y for treatment of osteoarthritis in older
women, see C.L. Baird and L.P. Sands, ‘Effect of guided imagery with
relaxation on health-related quality of life in older women with
osteoarthritis’, Resear ch in Nursing and Health , 2006, 29(5), 442–451.
For use of guided imagery for treatment of interstitial cystitis, see D.J.
Carrico et al., ‘Guided Imagery for Women with Interstitial Cystitis: Results
of a Prospective, Randomized Controlled Pilot Study’, Alternative and
Complementary Medicine , 2008, 14(1), 53–60.
For use of guided imagery in wound healing after gallbladd er removal
surgery (cholecystectomy), see C. Holden-Lund, ‘Effects of relaxation with
guided imagery on surgical stress and wound healing’, Resear ch in Nursing
and Health , 2007, 1 1(4), 235–244.
For the study that examined the ef fect of visualization ability , see:
E. Watanabe et al., ‘Differences  in Relaxation by Means of Guided
Imagery in a Healthy Community Sample’, Alternative Therapies in
Health and Medicine , 2006, 12(2), 60–66.
See also:
E. Watanabe et al., ‘Effects among healthy subjects of the duration of
regularly practicing a guided imagery program’, BMC
Complementary and Alternative Medicine , 2005, 5, 21.
K. Kwek keboom et al., ‘Imaging ability and effective use of guided
imagery’, Resear ch in Nursing and Health , 1998, 21(3), 189–98.
For the use of guided imagery for treatment of fibromyalgia pain, see E.A.
Fors et al., ‘The effect of guided imagery and amitriptylin e on daily
fibromyalgia pain: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial’, Journal of
Psychiatric Resear ch, 2002, 36(3), 179–87.
For the study where volunte ers imagined eating M&M’ s, see C.K.
Morewedge et al., ‘Thought for Food: Imagined Consumption Reduces
Actual Consumption’, Science , 2010, 330(6010), 1530–1533.
Chapter 1 1: To Stress, or Not to Stress
The reference for the 2004 meta-analysis linking stress with the immune
system is S. Segerstrom and G.E. Miller , ‘Psychological Stress and the
Human Immune  System: A Meta-Analytic Study of 30 Years of Inquiry’,
Psychological Bulletin , 2004, 130(4), 601–30.
For the effects of stress on the composition of wound fluid, see E.
Broadbent et al., ‘Psychological Stress Impairs Early Wound Repair
Following Sur gery’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 2003, 65, 865–69.
For the effects of stress on HIV and how it increases viral replication, see
S.W. Cole et al., ‘Impaired respo nse to HAAR T in HIV-infected individuals
with high autonomic nervous system activity’, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA , 2001, 98(22), 12695–700.
For the 18-mon th study linking shyness with rate of viral replication, see
S.W. Cole et al., ‘Psychological risk factors for HIV pathogene sis:
mediation by the autonomic nervous system’, Biological Psychiatry , 2003,
54(12), 1444–56.
For the study where students wrote about traumatic experien ces on four
consecutive days, see J.W. Pennebaker and S.K. Beall, ‘Confronting a
Traumatic Event: Toward an Understanding of Inhibition and Disease’,
Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 1986, 95(3), 274–81.
For the effect of writing about traumatic experiences and the hepatitis B
vaccination, see K.J. Petrie et al., ‘Disclosure of Trauma and Immune
Response to Hepatitis B Vaccin ation Program’, Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology , 1995, 63(5), 787–92.
For the effect of writing on viral load and CD4 cell counts of HIV patients,
see K.J. Petrie et al., ‘Effect of Written Emotional Expression on Immune
Function in Patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection: A
Randomized Trial’, Psychosomatic Medicine , 2004, 66, 272–275.
For effects of emotional support  on the health of breast cancer patients, see
B.L. Andersen et al., ‘Distress Reduction from a Psychological Intervention
Contributes to Improved Health  for Cancer Patients’, Brain, Behavior , and
Immunity , 2007, 21(7), 953–61.
For the effect of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on the health
of breast and prostate cancer patients, see:
L.E. Carlson et al., ‘One-Y ear Pre-Post Intervention Followup of
Psychological, Immune, Endocrine and Blood Pressure Outcom es of
Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction (MBSR) in Breast and Prostate
Cancer Outpatie nts’, Brain, Behavior , and Immunity , 2007, 21(8),
1038–49.
L.E. Carlson et al., ‘Mindfulnes s-based stress reduction in relation to
quality of life, mood, symptoms of stress and levels of cortisol,
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and melatonin in breast
and prostate cancer outpatients’, Psychoneur oendocrinology , 2004,
29(4), 448–74.
M. Speca et al., ‘A Randomized, Wait-List Controlled Clinical Trial:
The Effect of a Mindfulness Meditation-based Stress Reduction
Program on Mood and Symptoms of Stress in Cancer Outpati ents’,
Psychosomatic Medicine , 2000, 62(5), 613–22.
For use of MBS R in control of glucose levels in Type 2 diabe tes patients,
see S. Rosenzweig et al., ‘Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction is
Associated with Improved Glycemic Control in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A
Pilot Study’, Alternative Ther apies in Health and Medicine , 2007, 13(5),
36–8.
For improvement in mood, and for reduced stress and anxiety in healthy
adults using meditation, see J.D. Lane et al., ‘Brief Meditation Training Can
Improve Perceived Stress and Negative Mood’, Alternative Therapies in
Health and Medicine , 2007, 13(1), 38–44.
For the effect of meditation at the genetic level, see J.A. Dusek et al.,
‘Genomic Counter -Stress Changes Induced by the Relaxation  Response’,
PLOS ONE , 2008, 3(7), e2576, 1–8.
I n d e x
A
Achterber g, Jeanne 98–9
acne 209–11
action observation 80–84, 90–92
acyclovir 23
addiction 61
affirmations
power of 147–9
as visualization commentary 149–50
ageing
being positive about 12–18
and exercising the brain 13–16
visualization to slow process of 211
AIDs see HIV/AIDs
allergies 139, 211–12
Alzheimer ’s disease 16, 45, 57
American Journal of Neur oradiology  51
analgesics 38–9, 45
natural 21, 73–4
placebos see placebos: for pain relief
anger 212–13
angina 40
antidepressants
brain’ s natural antidepressants 21
and placebo ef fect 21, 33–4
anxiety 213
and insomnia 241
apomorphine 31
Archives of General Psychiatry  3–4, 66
arrhythmia 214
arteries 6
arthritis 214–15
osteoarthritis 214–15
rheumatoid 125, 138, 214–15, 250–51
aspirin 38–9
asthma 24, 75
visualization treatment 110, 215–16
atherosclerosis 216–17
athlete’ s foot 217
autoimmune conditions 217–18
B
bacterial infection 176–8, 226, 230, 244, 249–50, 252–3, 256–7, 258–9
BCIs (brain–computer interfaces) 79–80
beliefs 26
and culture 37–8
and drug ef fectiveness 33–48
and placebos xiii–xiv, 19–20, 22–32 see also  placebos
positive belief and visualization 122
power of believing 19–32
Benedetti, Fabrizio 19–20, 21, 27, 30, 31, 73–4
Benson, Herbert 40
Biological Psychiatry  126–7
blood counts 99–100, 126, 128
blood pressure
and attitude 12
and exercise 26
high 218
low 219
and meditation 130
and oxytocin 61, 121
and visualization 193, 218–19
bone fractures 219–20
Bowen, Will: A Complaint Fr ee W orld 8–9
Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University 132
brain
and addiction 61
and age-related mental decline 13–14
brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) 79–80
brain-heart link 23
connections with every part of body 76
decreasing use 13–14, 15
exercising the brain as you grow older 13–15
hippocampus 55–6
imaging/scans 20, 21, 54, 77, 82, 83
learning as means of exercising the brain 15–16, 56–7
maps 49–50, 51, 53–4, 56
meditation’ s effect on 52–3
and mind–DNA  interface 65, 67 see also  DNA: mind–DNA  interface
and mindfulness, with attention on breath xiv, 52
mind’ s effect on xiv, 14–16, 49–57
natural analgesics 21, 73–4
natural antidepressants 21
neural circuits 32
neurogenesis see neurogenesis
neurons see neurons
neuropeptide production 60–61
neuroplasticity 14, 49–57
neuroscience 15–16
neurotransmitters 59
and placebos 20–22, 32
positive attitude’ s effect on 13–16, 54
and talk therapies 54–5
thinking’ s effects on 14–16, 49–57, 59, 62–3
visualization’ s effect on xiv, 52–3
‘wiring in’  a picture of wellness 122–3
Brain, Behaviour and Immunity  128–9
breathing
brain af fected by attention on xiv, 52
and meditation/mindfulness xiv, 52, 130
British Journal of Cancer  103
British Medical Journal  28
bronchitis 219
burns 220–21
C
cancer
breast 103–6, 128–9, 130
chemotherapy treatment see chemotherapy
fatigue with 46, 48
lowering risk of 68, 69
metastatic 106
naproxen treatment 45
stress release through emotional support sessions 128–9
and visualization 103–8, 221–4 success stories 154–64
candida 224
capsaicin 73–4
cardiomyogenesis 70–71
Carvalho, Cláudio 47–8
cellulite 224
Charalambous, Andreas 107
chemotherapy 160, 161, 183
hair loss 184
visualization with xiv, 103–6, 107–8, 114, 124, 159, 160
chickenpox 225–6
childhood trauma 55
chlamydia 226
cholesterol 12
clofibrate vs placebo treatment to lower 23, 42
Chopra, Deepak: Magical Mind, Magical Body  16
chronic fatigue syndrome see ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis)
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 109–10
Church, Dawson: The Genie in Y our Genes  21, 67
clofibrate 23, 42
colds 226–7, 234
compassion xiv, 52, 60, 121, 204, 229, 246
see also  kindness
complaining 8–10, 53–4, 68
conditioning 29–30, 32
Connolly , Billy 16
Croft, Roy 197
cultural ef fect 37–8
cuts 228
cyclosporin A 30
cystic fibrosis 228–30
cystitis 230
interstitial 111
cytotoxicity 105, 106
D
Dalai Lama 204
dance 15–16, 57
victory dance 144, 182
depression 34, 230–31
see also  antidepressants
diabetes 130, 138, 231–2
diarrhoea 232
diazepam 46
Dispenza, Joe
Evolve Y our Brain  62
You Are the Placebo  167
DNA  59, 64
and cystic fibrosis 229–30
mind–DNA  interface 64–71
and mind–stem cell interface 69–71
Doidge, Norman 51, 53
dopamine 21, 32, 59
drugs
analgesic see analgesics
angina 40
antidepressant see antidepressants
effectiveness
boosted by belief 33–48
boosted by placebos 29–32
in knowledge and ignorance of treatment 44–6
vs placebos 23, 29–32, 33–4, 42, 45
heart 23
packaging 39
and the power of perception 38–41
for stomach ulcers 38, 42
swapping drugs for placebos 29–32
trials 26–8, 33–4
visualized as working 114–15
E
emotional contagion 82–4
emphysema 232
empowerment 121
endometriosis 232–3
endorphin 61
enteritis 233
epilepsy 234
European Journal of Neur oscience  81
exercise 12
and neurogenesis 56, 57
and performance-enhancing placebos 25–6
Experimental Brain Resear ch 88
F
flu 226–7, 234
Frankl, Viktor: Man’ s Sear ch for Meaning  7–8
G
gastroenteritis 233
genes
lifestyle and the overruling of 67–9
mind–gene ef fect
and mind–DNA  interface 64–71
and mind–stem cell interface 69–71
and stress see stress: genetic ef fects
glands, swollen 234–5
gonorrhoea 235–6
gratitude 54, 68, 197, 198–9, 241
growth hormones 30, 32, 65, 66
Gunnell, Sally 89
H
haemorrhoids 236
happiness
and giving away money 10–12
life satisfaction 8
hay fever 188
healing process 63, 65–6
brain ‘wiring in’  a picture of wellness 122–3
natural recovery 123
and stress see stress: and the healing process
heart
arrhythmia/palpitations 214
and attitude 5–7
brain-heart link 23
disease
and stress 125
visualization treatment 174–80, 236–7
drugs and placebos 23
Helman, C.G.: ‘Placebos and Nocebos’  35–6
hepatitis 237
Hesse, Hermann 206
hippocampus 55–6
HIV/AIDs
and stress 126–7, 128
visualization treatment 237–8
Holden, Robert 204
hormones 64–5
growth 30, 32, 65, 66
and love xiv, 71
neuropeptides see neuropeptides
positive feelings and the production of xiv
stress xiv, 115
hostility 6–7, 65–6, 68
hydrocortisone 23
hypertension 218
hypotension 219
I
IBS see irritable bowel syndrome imagination
power of xiv, 77–84
visualization see visualization
immune system
and blood counts 99–100
enhancement through
visualization xiv, 97–101, 140–41, 238–9
and cancer 103–6
targeted imagery 98–101, 117
and the placebo ef fect 30
positive attitude’ s effect on 4–5
secretory immunoglobulin A (s-IgA) 98–9
and stress 121, 125
infection visualizations
bacterial 176–8, 226, 230, 244, 249–50, 252–3, 256–7, 258–9
general 239–40
protozoa 250
throat infections 257
viral 225, 226–7, 234, 244, 260–61
worm 262–3
see also specific conditions
inflammation 233
visualization treatment 186–8, 233, 240–41
sinusitis 252–3
swollen glands 234–5
insomnia and sleeping problems 125, 241
interstitial cystitis 111
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 46, 47
visualization treatment 242
J
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  128
Journal of Neur ophysiology  76
Journal of Neur oscience  21, 51
Journal of Psychiatric Resear ch 116
Journal of the American Medical Association  7
K
Kandel, Eric 54
Kaptchuk, Ted 47–8
Kim Tae-Ho 91–3
kindness xiv, 60, 61, 121, 198, 200
going the extra mile 199–202
‘Loving-Kindness’  meditation 52
pinging 202–4
side ef fects 202
Kirsch, Irving 47–8
knee replacement, total 110–11
L
Langer , Ellen 14–15
language learning 15–16, 56–7
Le Guin, Ursula K. 197
learning 15–16, 56–7
leptin 246
Levothyroxine 190
life satisfaction 8
and giving away money 10–12
and longevity 13
and positive attitude 13
see also  happiness; quality of life
lifestyle 67–9, 123–4
love
and hormones xiv, 71
‘Loving-Kindness’  meditation 52
power of 195–206
see also  compassion
Lupus (SLE) 183–6, 242
M
malaria 242–3
Matsumura, Molleen 197
May, Mitchell 167
McDonald, Evy 167
ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis)
drug and placebo treatments 23–4
visualization treatment 173–4, 243
measles 243–4
mechanical ventilation 108–9
meditation
with attention on breath xiv, 52, 130
and the brain xiv
health impact 129–32
‘Loving-Kindness’  52
and stress 129–32
visualization see visualization
see also  mindfulness
meningitis 244
Menninger , Karl 202
mental decline, age-related 13–14
migraine 37, 40, 46
mind–body connection 59–71
and action observation 80–84, 90–92
brain see brain
brain’ s connection to every part of body 76
and emotional contagion 82–4
and the healing process 63, 65–6
brain ‘wiring in’  a picture of wellness 122–3
mind–DNA  interface and the mind–gene ef fect 64–71
and mind–stem cell interface 69–71
and mirror neurons 80–84, 90–91
and muscle xiv, 76–83
and neuropeptides see neuropeptides
and positive mind-set see positive attitude/thinking
and stem cells 69–71 see also  stem cells
and stress 63, 65, 66
thinking’ s effect on brain 14–16, 49–57, 59, 62–3
and visualization see visualization
mindfulness
with attention on breath xiv, 52, 130
and the brain 52
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) 130–31
mirror neurons 80–84, 90–91
Moerman, Daniel: Meaning, Medicine and the ‘Placebo Effect’  35, 36–7,
40
money 10–12
Morewedge, Carey 113
morphine 45
Mulhearn, Stephen 205–6
multiple sclerosis (MS) 244–5
muscles
building with use of mind xiv, 76–9, 81–2
and emotional contagion 82–3
tears 245
and visualization xiv, 77–81, 245
myalgic encephalomyelitis see ME
N
naproxen 45
natural killer (NK) cells 105–6
neurogenesis 13–15, 55–7, 70
and stress 70
Neur oImage  50, 82
neurons
and emotional contagion 82–3
firing of 59
mirror 80–84, 90–91
neural connections 49, 53, 55, 59–60, 63
plasticity see neuroplasticity
receptors 60–61
regeneration of see neurogenesis
stress damage 55
visualization and neurorehabilitation 86–8
neuropeptides 60–61, 63, 65
and receptors 60–61, 62, 64
and visualization 121
see also  oxytocin
neuroplasticity 14, 49–57, 59–61, 122–3
Neur orehabilitation and Neural Repair  88
neuroscience 15–16, 76, 83
see also  brain: imaging/scans
neurotransmitters 59
see also  dopamine
nitric oxide synthase 64
nocebos 24
O
obesity 125
visualization treatment for losing weight 112–14, 189–90, 245–7, 262
‘open-label placebo’  (OLP) studies 46–8
optimism 3–4, 5
placebos and the power of 29
osteoarthritis 111
oxytocin 60, 66, 70–71, 121
P
pain relief
and the brain’ s natural analgesics 21, 73–4
placebo treatment see placebos: for pain relief
and the power of perception 38–9
visualization treatment 247–8
palpitations 214
Panadol 39
paracetamol 39
Parkinson’ s disease 20, 31, 88, 248–9
Pascual-Leone, Alvaro 77
Pennebaker , James 128
peptic ulcers 42
medication 38, 42
visualization treatment 249
perception, and the ef fectiveness of drugs and placebos 38–41
phantom pains 83–4
placebos
and antidepressants 21, 33–4
and belief xiii–xiv, 19–20, 22–32
blue tablets 36–7
and the brain 20–22, 32
chronic fatigue treatment 23–4
and conditioning 29–30, 32
cultural ef fect 37–8
and drug trials 26–8, 33–4
effectiveness
vs drugs 23, 29–32, 33–4, 42, 45
injections vs tablets xiii, 27–8, 37
levels 22–3
when patient knows its identity 46–8
with heart drugs 23
lowering cholesterol 23
‘open-label placebo’  (OLP) studies 46–8
packaging 39
for pain relief 30, 45, 73–5
and the brain 20–21
injections vs tablets xiii, 27–8, 37
migraine 37, 41
packaging ef fect 39
and the power of perception 38–9
and Parkinson’ s disease 20, 31
performance-enhancing 25–6
Placebo Controlled Dose Reduction (PCDR) 31–2
and the power of optimism 29
and the power of positive consultation 26–8
sham sur gery 43–4
swapping drugs for 29–32
taking full course 41–3
pneumonia 249–50
positive attitude/thinking 3–18
about ageing 12–18
and blood pressure 12
and the brain 13–16, 54
complaint-free 8–10, 54
and gene ‘upregulation’  66
health impact of supporting others 6
and the heart 5–7
and the immune system 4–5
and life satisfaction 8
optimism see optimism
overruling our genes 67–9
positive belief and visualization 122
positive consultation 26–8
post-polio syndrome 165–7
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  126
proteins 59, 63, 64, 65
p53 ‘guardian of the genome’  223
see also  growth hormones
protozoa 250
psoriasis 168–73
Psychoneur oendocrinology  66
Psychosomatic Medicine  24, 128
Q
quality of life 48, 104, 107, 111, 115
R
randomized controlled trials 47–8, 103–8, 124
receptors 62, 64, 231–2
neural 60–61
rehabilitation 85–8
stroke 82, 86–8
visualization and neurorehabilitation 86–8
relaxation imagery 98, 107, 115
Relaxation Response 131
rheumatoid arthritis 125, 138, 214–15, 250–51
Rossi, Ernest L.: The Psychobiology of Gene Expr ession  71
S
Salk Laboratories 56
Saotome, Mitsugi 196
scars
chickenpox 226
visualization treatment 226, 251
sciatica 251–2
Science  26
self-esteem 252
serotonin 59
Shakespeare, William: Romeo and Juliet  203
sham sur gery 43–4
Siegel, Bernie 167
sinusitis 252–3
sleeping problems 125, 241
social support 66
spinal cord injuries 253–4
sports 85–8
spots (acne) 209–11
stem cells
mind–stem cell interface 69–71
visualized 178, 244–5, 254, 259
stomach ulcers see peptic ulcers
stress 63, 125–33
and childhood trauma 55
conditions linked to 125, 126
genetic ef fects 60, 68
‘downregulation’  66
handling 128–33
and the healing process 70, 125
natural recovery 123
slowing wound healing 65, 66, 126
hormones xiv, 115
and the immune system 121, 125
and meditation 129–32
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) 130–31
neural damage from 55
and neurogenesis 70
release from
and natural recovery 123
replaced with gratitude 197
through talking and writing about 127–9
visualization treatment 255–6
stroke
rehabilitation 82, 86–8
visualization treatment 256
suffering 205–6
sumatriptan 30
supporting others, health impact 6
syphilis 256–7
T
T-cells 105, 171
Tagamet 38
talk therapies 54–5
thinking positively see positive attitude/thinking
throat infections 257
thyroid, underactive 190–93
toxins 257–8
travel sickness 180–81
tuberculosis (TB) 258–9
U
ulcers
stomach see peptic ulcers
visualization treatment 249
V
Vallance, Aaron K. 39–40
varicose veins 260
verrucas 181–2, 261
Viagra 39–40
viral infections 100, 260–61
chickenpox 225–6
flu/colds 4–5, 226–7, 234
HIV see HIV/AIDs
visualization treatment 225, 226–7, 234, 244, 260–61
visualization
affirmations as commentary on 149–50
and the brain xiv, 52–3
clear mental representation 115–16
conditions responsive to acne 209–11
ageing process 211
allergies 139, 211–12
anger 212–13
anxiety 213
asthma 110, 215–16
atherosclerosis 216–17
athlete’ s foot 217
autoimmune conditions 217–18
bone fractures 219–20
bronchitis 219
burns 220–21
cancer see cancer
candida 224
cellulite 224–5
chickenpox 225–6
chlamydia 226
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 109–10
colds 226–7, 234
cuts 228
cystic fibrosis 228–30
cystitis 230
depression 230–31
diabetes type 1 231
diabetes type 2 231–2
diarrhoea 232
emphysema 232
endometriosis 232–3
enteritis 233
epilepsy 234
flu 226–7, 234
glands, swollen 234–5
gonorrhoea 235–6
haemorrhoids 236
hay fever 188, 236
heart disease 174–80, 236–7
heart palpitations (arrhythmia) 214
hepatitis 237
HIV/AIDs 237–8
hypertension 218
hypotension 219
immune system see immune system: enhancement through
visualization
infections see infection visualizations
inflammation 186–8, 233, 234–5, 240–41
insomnia 241
interstitial cystitis 111
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 242
low self-esteem 252
Lupus 183–6, 242
malaria 242–3
ME 173–4, 243
measles 243–4
meningitis 244
multiple sclerosis 244–5
muscle tears 245
obesity see obesity
osteoarthritis 111, 214–15
overweight/obesity problems 112–14, 189–90, 245–7, 262
pain 247–8
Parkinson’ s disease 248–9
pneumonia 249–50
post-polio syndrome 165–7
psoriasis 168–73
rheumatoid arthritis 214–15, 250–51
scars 226, 251
sciatica 251–2
sinusitis 252–3
spinal cord injuries 253–4
stress 255–6
stroke 256
syphilis 256–7
total knee replacement 110–11
toxins 257–8
travel sickness 180–81
tuberculosis (TB) 258–9
ulcers (peptic or other) 249
varicose veins 260
verrucas 181–2, 261
warts 181–2, 261
wound healing 111–12
creativity in 144
direct ef fects via neuropeptides 121
direct ef fects via the nervous system 120
drawing or painting 143
drugs visualized as working 114–15
and empowerment 121
frequency 142–3
fun with 144–5
key of turning illness/injury to wellness 141–2
lacking seeming ef fect 123–4
and muscle xiv, 77–81, 245
pathways 120–24
practice tips 143–5
and randomized controlled trials 103–8, 124
record keeping 143
for rehabilitation 85–8
relaxation imagery 98, 107, 115
resources 145
for sports 85–6, 88–95
success stories 153–93
cancer 154–64
cardiovascular 174–80
hay fever 188
Lupus 183–6
ME 173–4
post-polio syndrome 165–7
psoriasis 168–73
travel sickness 180–81
underactive thyroid 190–93
verrucas/plantar warts 181–2
weight loss 189–90
targeted imagery
biologically tar geted imagery 110
immune system 98–101, 117
non-immune system 107–8, 110
types 136–41
active change 137
clean and polish 137–8
colour change 140
immune boost see immune system: enhancement through visualization
intervene in a process 138–9
speak to your cells 139
symbolic change 139–40
weaning from mechanical ventilation 108–9
for weight loss 112–14, 189–90, 245–7, 262
and will to live 122–3
W
Waitley , Denis 198
warts 181–2, 261
weight
and attitude 12
loss 26
with visualization 112–14, 189–90, 245–7, 262
see also  obesity
will to live 122–3
worm infections 262–3
wound healing
after gallbladder removal 111–12
and oxytocin 121
slowed by stress or hostility 65–6, 126
speeded by social support 66
visualization treatment 111–12
see also  scars
Z
Zantac 38
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Photo: Stephen Mulhearn
Dr David Hamilton  was formerly a scientist within the pharmaceutical
industry , where he worked at developing drugs for cardiovascular disease
and cancer . Inspired by the placebo effect, he left the industry to write
books and educate people in how they can harness their mind and emotions
to improve their health.
David is now the author of 10 books, including The Five Side Effects of
Kindness  and I Heart Me. He is the ‘Kindness Czar ’ for Psychologies
magazine, the ‘Life Hacks’  columnist for Soul & Spirit  magazine and writes
occasional blogs for the Huffington Post .
He has appeared on Channel 4’s Sunday Brunch  in the UK and CBS Sunday
Morning  in the USA, and is also featured in the documentary HEAL .
 DavidRHamiltonPhD
 DrDRHamilton
 DavidRHamiltonPhD
www .drdavidhamilton.com


