NIMH
Schizophrenia
What is schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that affects how a person thinks, feels, and behaves. People with schizophrenia may seem like they have lost touch with reality, which can be distressing for them and for their family and friends. The symptoms of schizophrenia can make it difficult to participate in usual, everyday activities, but effective treatments are available. Many people who receive treatment can engage in school or work, achieve independence, and enjoy personal relationships.

What are the signs and symptoms of schizophrenia?
It’s important to recognize the symptoms of schizophrenia and seek help as early as possible. People with schizophrenia are usually diagnosed between the ages of 16 and 30, after the first episode of psychosis. Starting treatment as soon as possible following the first episode of psychosis is an important step toward recovery. However, research shows that gradual changes in thinking, mood, and social functioning often appear before the first episode of psychosis. Schizophrenia is rare in younger children.

Schizophrenia symptoms can differ from person to person, but they generally fall into three main categories: psychotic, negative, and cognitive.

Psychotic symptoms include changes in the way a person thinks, acts, and experiences the world. A person experiencing psychotic symptoms often has disrupted thoughts and perceptions, and they may have difficulty recognizing what is real and what is not. Psychotic symptoms include:

Hallucinations: When a person sees, hears, smells, tastes, or feels things that are not actually there. Hearing voices is common for people with schizophrenia. People who hear voices may hear them for a long time before family or friends notice a problem.
Delusions: When a person has strong beliefs that are not true and may seem irrational to others. For example, individuals experiencing delusions may believe that people on the radio and television are sending special messages that require a certain response, or they may believe that they are in danger or that others are trying to hurt them.
Thought disorder: When a person has ways of thinking that are unusual or illogical. People with thought disorder may have trouble organizing their thoughts and speech. Sometimes a person will stop talking in the middle of a thought, jump from topic to topic, or make up words that have no meaning.
Negative symptoms include loss of motivation, loss of interest or enjoyment in daily activities, withdrawal from social life, difficulty showing emotions, and difficulty functioning normally.

Negative symptoms include:

Having trouble planning and sticking with activities, such as grocery shopping
Having trouble anticipating and being motivated by pleasure in everyday life
Talking in a dull voice and showing limited facial expression
Avoiding social interaction or interacting in socially awkward ways
Having very low energy and spending a lot of time in passive activities. In extreme cases, a person might stop moving or talking for a while, which is a rare condition called catatonia.
These symptoms are sometimes mistaken for symptoms of depression or other mental illnesses.

Cognitive symptoms include problems in attention, concentration, and memory. These symptoms can make it hard to follow a conversation, learn new things, or remember appointments. A person’s level of cognitive functioning is one of the best predictors of their day-to-day functioning. Health care providers evaluate cognitive functioning using specific tests.

Cognitive symptoms include:

Having trouble processing information to make decisions
Having trouble using information immediately after learning it
Having trouble focusing or paying attention
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  has recognized that having certain mental disorders, including depression and schizophrenia, can make people more likely to get severely ill from COVID-19. Learn more about getting help and finding a health care provider.

Risk of violence
Most people with schizophrenia are not violent. Overall, people with schizophrenia are more likely than those without the illness to be harmed by others. For people with schizophrenia, the risk of self-harm and of violence to others is greatest when the illness is untreated or co-occurs with alcohol or substance misuse. It is important to help people who are showing symptoms to get treatment as quickly as possible.

Schizophrenia vs. dissociative identity disorder
Although some of the signs may seem similar on the surface, schizophrenia is not dissociative identity disorder (which used to be called multiple personality disorder or split personality). People with dissociative identity disorder have two or more distinct identities with distinct behaviors and memories.

What are the risk factors for schizophrenia?
Several factors may contribute to a person’s risk of developing schizophrenia.

Genetics: Schizophrenia sometimes runs in families. However, just because one family member has schizophrenia, it does not mean that other members of the family also will have it. Studies suggest that many different genes may increase a person’s chances of developing schizophrenia, but that no single gene causes the disorder by itself.

Environment: Research suggests that a combination of genetic factors and aspects of a person’s environment and life experiences may play a role in the development of schizophrenia. These environmental factors that may include living in poverty, stressful or dangerous surroundings, and exposure to viruses or nutritional problems before birth.

Brain structure and function: Research shows that people with schizophrenia may be more likely to have differences in the size of certain brain areas and in connections between brain areas. Some of these brain differences may develop before birth. Researchers are working to better understand how brain structure and function may relate to schizophrenia.

How is schizophrenia treated?
Current treatments for schizophrenia focus on helping people manage their symptoms, improve day-to-day functioning, and achieve personal life goals, such as completing education, pursuing a career, and having fulfilling relationships.

Antipsychotic medications
Antipsychotic medications can help make psychotic symptoms less intense and less frequent. These medications are usually taken every day in a pill or liquid forms. Some antipsychotic medications are given as injections once or twice a month.

If a person’s symptoms do not improve with usual antipsychotic medications, they may be prescribed clozapine. People who take clozapine must have regular blood tests to check for a potentially dangerous side effect that occurs in 1-2% of patients.

People respond to antipsychotic medications in different ways. It is important to report any side effects to a health care provider. Many people taking antipsychotic medications experience side effects such as weight gain, dry mouth, restlessness, and drowsiness when they start taking these medications. Some of these side effects may go away over time, while others may last.

Shared decision making  between health care providers and patients is the recommended strategy for determining the best type of medication or medication combination and the right dose. To find the latest information about antipsychotic medications, talk to a health care provider and visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website .

Psychosocial treatments
Psychosocial treatments help people find solutions to everyday challenges and manage symptoms while attending school, working, and forming relationships. These treatments are often used together with antipsychotic medication. People who participate in regular psychosocial treatment are less likely to have symptoms reoccur or to be hospitalized.

Examples of this kind of treatment include types of psychotherapy such as cognitive behavioral therapy, behavioral skills training, supported employment, and cognitive remediation interventions.

Education and support
Educational programs can help family and friends learn about symptoms of schizophrenia, treatment options, and strategies for helping loved ones with the illness. These programs can help friends and family manage their distress, boost their own coping skills, and strengthen their ability to provide support. The National Alliance on Mental Illness website has more information about support groups and education .

Coordinated specialty care
Coordinated specialty care (CSC) programs are recovery-focused programs for people with first episode psychosis, an early stage of schizophrenia. Health care providers and specialists work together as a team to provide CSC, which includes psychotherapy, medication, case management, employment and education support, and family education and support. The treatment team works collaboratively with the individual to make treatment decisions, involving family members as much as possible.

Compared with typical care, CSC is more effective at reducing symptoms, improving quality of life, and increasing involvement in work or school.

Assertive community treatment
Assertive community treatment (ACT)  is designed especially for people with schizophrenia who are likely to experience multiple hospitalizations or homelessness. ACT is usually delivered by a team of health care providers who work together to provide care to patients in the community.

Treatment for drug and alcohol misuse
People with schizophrenia may also have problems with drugs and alcohol. A treatment program that includes treatment for both schizophrenia and substance use is important for recovery because substance use can interfere with treatment for schizophrenia.

How can I find help for schizophrenia?
If you have concerns about your mental health, talk to a primary care provider. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out the next steps. Find tips for talking with a health care provider about your mental health.

You can learn more about getting help on the NIMH website. You can also learn about finding support   and locating mental health services  in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website.

It can be difficult to know how to help someone who is experiencing psychosis.

Here are some things you can do:

Help them get treatment and encourage them to stay in treatment.
Remember that their beliefs or hallucinations seem very real to them.
Be respectful, supportive, and kind without tolerating dangerous or inappropriate behavior.
Look for support groups and family education programs, such as those offered by the National Alliance on Mental Illness .

Mayo Clinic 

Overview

Schizophrenia is a serious mental health condition that affects how people think, feel and behave. It may result in a mix of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized thinking and behavior. Hallucinations involve seeing things or hearing voices that aren't observed by others. Delusions involve firm beliefs about things that are not true. People with schizophrenia can seem to lose touch with reality, which can make daily living very hard.

People with schizophrenia need lifelong treatment. This includes medicine, talk therapy and help in learning how to manage daily life activities.

Because many people with schizophrenia don't know they have a mental health condition and may not believe they need treatment, many research studies have examined the results of untreated psychosis. People who have psychosis that is not treated often have more-severe symptoms, more stays in a hospital, poorer thinking and processing skills and social outcomes, injuries, and even death. On the other hand, early treatment often helps control symptoms before serious complications arise, making the long-term outlook better.
Symptoms

Schizophrenia involves a range of problems in how people think, feel and behave. Symptoms may include:

    Delusions. This is when people believe in things that aren't real or true. For example, people with schizophrenia could think that they're being harmed or harassed when they aren't. They could think that they're the target for certain gestures or comments when they aren't. They may think they're very famous or have great ability when that's not the case. Or they could feel that a major disaster is about to occur when that's not true. Most people with schizophrenia have delusions.
    Hallucinations. These usually involve seeing or hearing things that other people don't observe. For people with schizophrenia, these things seem real. Hallucinations can occur with any of the senses, but hearing voices is most common.
    Disorganized speech and thinking. Disorganized speech causes disorganized thinking. It can be hard for people with schizophrenia to talk with other people. The answers people with schizophrenia give to questions may not be related to what's being asked. Or questions may not be answered fully. Rarely, speech may include putting together unrelated words in a way that can't be understood. Sometimes this is called word salad.
    Extremely disorganized or unusual motor behavior. This may show in several ways, from childlike silliness to being agitated for no reason. Behavior isn't focused on a goal, so it's hard to do tasks. People with schizophrenia may not want to follow instructions. They may move in ways that are not typical or not appropriate to the social setting. Or they may not move much or respond at all.
    Negative symptoms. People with schizophrenia may not be able to function in the way they could before their illness started. For example, they may not bathe, make eye contact or show emotions. They may speak in a monotone voice and not be able to feel pleasure. Also, they may lose interest in everyday activities, socially withdraw and have a hard time planning ahead.

Symptoms can vary in type and how severe they are. At times, symptoms may get better or worse. Some symptoms may be present at all times.

People with schizophrenia usually are diagnosed in the late teen years to early 30s. In men, schizophrenia symptoms usually start in the late teens to early 20s. In women, symptoms usually begin in the late 20s to early 30s. There also is a group of people — usually women — who are diagnosed later in life. It isn't common for children to be diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Symptoms in teenagers

Schizophrenia symptoms in teenagers are like those in adults, but the condition may be harder to pinpoint. That's because some early symptoms of schizophrenia — those that occur before hallucinations, delusions and disorganization — are commonly seen in many teens, such as:

    Withdrawing from friends and family.
    Not doing well in school.
    Having trouble sleeping.
    Feeling irritable or depressed.
    Lacking motivation.

Also, the use of recreational drugs, such as marijuana, stimulants like cocaine and methamphetamines, or hallucinogens, can cause similar symptoms. Compared with adults with schizophrenia, teens with the condition may be less likely to have delusions and more likely to have hallucinations.
When to see a doctor

People with schizophrenia often don't know that they have a mental condition that needs medical attention. As a result, family or friends often need to get them help.
Helping someone who may have schizophrenia

If people you know have symptoms of schizophrenia, talk to them about your concerns. While you can't force them to seek help, you can offer encouragement and support. You also can help them find a healthcare professional or mental health professional.

If people are a danger to themselves or others, or they don't have food, clothing or shelter, you may need to call 911 in the U.S. or other emergency responders for help. A mental health professional needs to evaluate them.

Some people may need an emergency stay in a hospital. Laws on mental health treatment against a person's will vary by state. You can contact community mental health agencies or police departments in your area for details.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior

Suicidal thoughts and attempts are much higher than average in people with schizophrenia. If a person is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure that someone stays with that person. Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).

Proper treatment of schizophrenia can reduce the risk of suicide.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

It isn't known what causes schizophrenia. But researchers believe that a mix of genetics, brain chemistry and environment can play a part.

Changes in certain naturally occurring brain chemicals, including neurotransmitters called dopamine and glutamate, may play a part in schizophrenia. Neuroimaging studies show changes in the brain structure and central nervous systems of people with schizophrenia. While researchers haven't yet been able to apply these findings to new treatments, the findings show that schizophrenia is a brain disease.
Risk factors

Although the cause of schizophrenia is not known, these factors seem to make schizophrenia more likely:

    A family history of schizophrenia.
    Life experiences, such as living in poverty, stress or danger.
    Some pregnancy and birth issues, such as not getting enough nutrition before or after birth, low birth weight, or exposure to toxins or viruses before birth that may affect brain development.
    Taking mind-altering — also called psychoactive or psychotropic — drugs as a teen or young adult.

Complications

Left untreated, schizophrenia can lead to severe problems that affect every area of life.

Complications that schizophrenia may cause or be related to include:

    Suicide, suicide attempts and thoughts of suicide.
    Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder, also known as OCD.
    Depression.
    Misuse of alcohol or other drugs, including nicotine.
    Not being able to work or attend school.
    Money problems and homelessness.
    Social isolation.
    Health and medical problems.
    Being victimized.
    Aggressive or violent behavior, though people with schizophrenia are more likely to be assaulted rather than assault others.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent schizophrenia. But staying with your treatment plan can help stop symptoms from returning or getting worse. Researchers hope that learning more about risk factors for schizophrenia may lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment.
Schizophrenia - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
11–14 minutes
Diagnosis

Diagnosis of schizophrenia involves ruling out other mental health conditions and making sure that symptoms aren't due to substance misuse, medicine or a medical condition.

Finding a diagnosis of schizophrenia may include:

    Physical exam. This may be done to rule out other problems that could cause similar symptoms and check for any related complications.
    Tests and screenings. These may include tests that help rule out conditions with similar symptoms and screening for alcohol and drug use. A healthcare professional also may request imaging studies, such as an MRI or a CT scan.
    Mental health evaluation. A healthcare professional or mental health professional checks mental status by noting how a person looks and behaves, and asking about thoughts, moods, delusions, hallucinations, substance use, and potential for violence or suicide. This evaluation includes family and personal history.

Treatment

Lifelong treatment with medicines and psychosocial therapy can help manage schizophrenia, though there is no cure for it. These treatments are needed, even when symptoms ease. Some people may need to stay in a hospital during a crisis if symptoms are severe.

A psychiatrist experienced in treating schizophrenia usually guides treatment. The treatment team also may include a psychologist, social worker, psychiatric nurse and case manager to coordinate care. The full-team approach may be available in clinics with expertise in schizophrenia treatment.
Medicines

Medicines are the main schizophrenia treatment. Antipsychotic medicines are the most prescribed drugs. They're thought to control symptoms mainly by affecting the brain neurotransmitter dopamine.

The goal of treatment with antipsychotic medicines is to manage symptoms at the lowest possible dose. To get the desired result, a healthcare professional or mental health professional may try different drugs and combinations of drugs, and different doses, over time. Other medicines also may help, such as antidepressants, mood stabilizers or antianxiety drugs. It can take several weeks to see whether the medicine helps symptoms get better.

Because medicines for schizophrenia can cause side effects, people with schizophrenia may not want to take them. A psychiatrist monitors for side effects and in some cases may order blood work. Medication choice can be guided to avoid certain unwanted side effects.

Ask your healthcare professional about the benefits and side effects of any medicine that's prescribed. Antipsychotic medicines can be classified as either first-generation or second-generation. Second-generation antipsychotic medicines may have fewer side effects related to muscle movements. This includes tardive dyskinesia, which causes repetitive and involuntary movements, such as grimacing, eye blinking and other movements. Tardive dyskinesia is sometimes permanent.
Second-generation antipsychotics

The newer, second-generation medicines available as a pill or capsule include:

    Aripiprazole (Abilify).
    Asenapine (Saphris).
    Brexpiprazole (Rexulti).
    Cariprazine (Vraylar).
    Clozapine (Clozaril.
    Iloperidone (Fanapt).
    Lumateperone (Caplyta).
    Lurasidone (Latuda).
    Olanzapine (Zyprexa).
    Paliperidone (Invega).
    Quetiapine (Seroquel).
    Risperidone (Risperdal).
    Ziprasidone (Geodon).

First-generation antipsychotics

First-generation antipsychotics include:

    Chlorpromazine.
    Fluphenazine.
    Haloperidol (Haldol).
    Perphenazine (Trilafon).

Long-acting injectable antipsychotics

Some antipsychotics may be given as a long-acting shot in the muscle or under the skin. They usually are given every 2 to 4 weeks but sometimes less often or more often. Ask your healthcare professional for more information on shots. They may be an option for people who prefer fewer pills. Also, shots may help people stay with their treatment plans.

Common medicines that are available as shots include:

    Aripiprazole (Abilify Maintena, Abilify Asimtufii, Aristada).
    Fluphenazine decanoate.
    Haloperidol decanoate.
    Paliperidone (Invega Sustenna, Invega Trinza, Invega Hafyera).
    Risperidone (Risperdal Consta, Perseris, others).

Psychosocial interventions

Once symptoms get better, continuing to take medicine is important. It's also important to take part in psychological and social or psychosocial treatments, including:

    Individual therapy. Talk therapy, also known as psychotherapy, may help improve patterns of thought. Also, learning to cope with stress and identify early warning signs of the return of symptoms can help people manage their illness.
    Social skills training. This focuses on making communication and social interactions better and making people with schizophrenia better able to take part in daily activities.
    Family therapy. During this therapy, families learn how to deal with schizophrenia. They also get support.
    Vocational rehabilitation and supported employment. This counseling focuses on helping people with schizophrenia prepare for, find and keep jobs.

Most people with schizophrenia need support in daily life. Many communities have programs to help people with schizophrenia with jobs, housing, self-help groups and crisis situations. A case manager or someone on the treatment team can help find resources. With the right treatment, most people with schizophrenia can manage their illness.
Hospital stay

During crisis periods or times of severe symptoms, people may need to stay in a hospital for their safety. A stay in a hospital also makes sure they eat right, get enough sleep and bathe regularly.
Electroconvulsive therapy

Healthcare professionals may consider electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) for adults with schizophrenia who don't respond to drug therapy. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a procedure done with medicine that puts you to sleep, called general anesthetic. While you are asleep, small electric currents are passed through the brain, causing a therapeutic seizure that lasts 1 to 2 minutes. ECT also can help people with depression.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Coping and support

Coping with a mental condition as serious as schizophrenia can be hard for people with the condition and their friends and family. Here are some steps that may help:

    Build strong relationships with members of your treatment team. Working closely with your healthcare professional, mental health professional and other care team members makes you better able to fully take part in, and benefit from, treatment.
    Learn about schizophrenia. Education about this condition can help you understand how important it is to follow your treatment plan. Education also can help friends and family learn more about the condition and be more compassionate toward those who have it.
    Get more sleep. If you're having trouble sleeping, lifestyle changes can help.
    Stay focused on goals. Managing schizophrenia is an ongoing process. Keeping treatment goals in mind can help you stay motivated, manage the condition and work toward your goals.
    Don't use alcohol or drugs. Using alcohol, nicotine or recreational drugs can make it hard to treat schizophrenia. But quitting can be hard. Get advice from your healthcare team on how best to quit.
    Ask about social services. These services may be able to help with affordable housing, transportation and other daily activities.
    Learn relaxation and stress management. Stress management techniques such as meditation, yoga or tai chi may help you and your loved ones.
    Join a support group. Support groups can help you reach out to others facing the same types of challenges. Support groups also may help family and friends cope.
