

Social Skills Guidebook
The Ultimate Guide for Improve Your
Conversation and Communication Skills,
How to Overcome Shyness with This
Easy Step-By-Step Course
© Copyright 2019 by Michael Godsey- All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct written permission from
the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author, for any damages,
reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase
any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been
executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied.
Readers acknowledge that the author is not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The
content within this book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting any
techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for any losses, direct or indirect,
which are incurred as a result of the use of information contained within this document, including, but not limited to, — errors,
omissions, or inaccuracies.
Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter  1: Beating Shyness and Social Anxiety Like a Boss
Build a more practical and reasonable image of others
Tackle your inhibitions and fears
Have more faith in people
Take risks to move outside your comfort zone
Build your patience, courage, will-power , perseverance
Build a more reasonable, practical and balanced picture of yourself
Manage your breath to regulate emotional reactions
Avoid self-defeatist, damaging and negative thoughts
Make daily reflection a habit
Identify problems and fears, along with their triggers
Chapter  2: Over coming Lack of Confide nce and the Fear  of Being
Judged
Judgments are unavoidable
Bring about a shift in your perception
Identify your strengths and weaknesses
Everything is temporary
You are not being judged all the while
Preparation is the key
Keenly consider your own judgments
Chapter  3: Secrets of Small Talk and Conversation Building No One
Will Tell You
Mirroring
Avoid discussing unknown, unfamiliar or complex topics
Use open-ended questions
Stay abreast with the day’ s news before going for a gathering or networking event
Maintain a balance between asking questions and making statements
Go with universal, non-controversial and neutral subjects
Disagree in a healthy and respectful manner
Ask for suggestions, recommendations, and advice
Always remember people names
Have the discussion or talk focus on the other person
Include personal stories, anecdotes, experiences and metaphors
Do some research groundwork
Develop superior listening skills
Avoid sharing increasingly personal/intimate details while engaging in small-talk
No conversation clues? Scan your surroundings
The 20-second rule
Killer conversation starters
Chapter  4: How to Use Voice, Speech, and Language for Being a Pro
Communicator  and Influencer
Maintain an even paced and steady rate of speech
Develop an articulate and extensive vocabulary
Emphasize on the correct word to communicate the intended message
Keep away from redundancy
Utilize inflection in speech ef fectively
Keep your pronunciations and enunciations clear
Chapter  5: Breaking Free from the Loop  of Negative Communication
Patterns
The mind readers
Obsessed with hijacking and winning conversations
Avoid playing Mr ./Ms. Fix-It all the time
Neutralizing messages
The seasoned defendants
Refrain from being a yes-man
Failure to recognize and adapt to someone’ s communication style
Closed minds
The stuck records
Conclusion
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Effective social and communication skills are non-negotiable in today’ s
world. Unless you know how to navigate your way through various social
situations with highly develope d communication skills, you may end up
underutilizing your potential or not being able to enjoy fulfilling
interpersonal/social relationships or not being able to live your life to the
fullest. People who master communication and social skills open up a world
of opportunities  for themselves. There is no limit to what you can
accomplish if you develop confidence, social skills, and effective
communication/interaction patterns.
The best thing is, even if you are not a communication pro or think you
don’t have the required confidence or charisma, it can be built (yes pretty
much like your muscles). You can transform from a nervous communicator
to confident, self-assured and assertive social being with consistent practice,
effort and the invaluable strategies mentioned in this book. We are all
inborn social beings and communicators. However , only a handful manages
to harness their communication skills and turn it into their strength.
Ace social skills are the founda tion of some of the strongest relationships,
both personal and professional . Everyone digs and follows an awesome
communicator . Look at any of the social media influencers and people with
a large following. They will almost always know how to build rapport with
their followers and build trust, which is why people will lap up everything
they say. That’ s why Instagrammers are raking in cool millions through
their endorseme nts and promotions. They are paid big bucks because they
possess the ability to sway people towards a particular brand or decision
based on their slick communication skills.
There is no escaping the fact that communication is needed in every sphere
of our life from  job interviews to impressing a date to networking to
building an enviable social circle. Communication is one of the most vital
productivity tools, helping you leave behind a favorable impression
wherever you go. Just imagine having a brain brimming with ideas but
unable to express those ideas. Wouldn’ t that be terrible? Communication is
the muscle that awards us the power to convey our ideas in a compelling
style, such that people are forced to sit up and take note.
Every relationship that we have in this world is somewhat determined by
how the other person or we relate to us. It is impossible to fulfill all our
requirements by ourselves. Relating to others or seeking help from them
needs commun ication. Want to experience the effects of a lack of
communication? Buy a ticket to a country whose local language you
absolutely cann ot comprehend. You’ll realize how tough it is to express
every tiny detail. It will be a mammoth task! Unless you and the other
person are sign language expert s, you’ll have a tough time communicating
even basic needs such as food or accommodation.
Effective communication skills equip a person with the ability to
collaborate, exchange ideas, share views, and generally relate to their
world. It makes the exchange of ideas less tough. The original superpower
of huma ns is the gift of expressi ng their ideas, socializing and collaborating
with each other . This is precise ly what led to our progress with creations
such as automobiles, roads and electrical gadgets. These things wouldn’ t
have been possible without exchanging ideas and communicating concepts.
Thus communication is permeable in every sphere of our life.
Now be honest,  alright? Tell me when you are introduced to someone for
the first time; on what basis do you form an impression about them without
knowing anything about them. Naturally , through the way they are dressed
or their communication skills, right? You hear them speak and go boom
wow or ohhh no, right? You can also use effective communication skills to
blow people away or influence/inspire them to do what you want. Yes, some
people will use it for wrongdoing (think manipulation and deceiving
people). Howev er, it is largely a kick-ass skill that will help you become a
mover and shaker of your profe ssional and social circle faster than you can
imagine. Once you master communication skills explained in this book,
you’ll wow people. Effective communicators are engaging, interesting and
persuasive.
Make no mistake, though. Comm unication is not only about talking but also
about being a great listener , practicing empathy and building rapport with
others through trust. Think about what happens to our brain’ s ability to
share ideas or complete tasks if we are unable to communicate. Why do you
think some of the world’ s best salespersons will manage to sell a comb to a
bald person? The answer is obvious – they possess the power to
communicate effectively enough to convince their buyers that they even
though they may not need the product, they will want to buy it. They make
their products and services desirable and irresistible, in a manne r in which it
becomes almost  impossible for the other person to refuse. It’s happened
countless times with us. We’ve bought things we don’t even need simply
because the salesperson sounded so damn convincing that refusing the
product or service was not even an option.
Visualize a life where you are an incredible people magnet who holds a
powerful influen ce and charm over others. Think how wonderful it would it
is to have people holding on to every word you speak. Think how amazing
it would be to leave people dazzled with your conversation skills. How
about drawing people to you through empathy and exception al listening
skills? Think about the wonders of being a person whose company
everyone craves and looks forward to. You will end up having an unspoken
hold influence over others along with the power to build meaningful,
fulfilling and highly beneficia l relationships that help you meet your
personal and professional goals. Communication is the master keys that are
capable of unlocking your truest potential and connect with others. The
world needs to see what you hold within, which is possible only through the
power of communication.
What if you were told that you could indeed be all of this and much more?
Of course, you can! Wherever you are hanging currently in your
communication skills quotient, you have the power to be the Master of
Social skill. Yes, even if you consider yourself the most awkward and
terrible communicator in the world. With the right intention and effort, you
won’ t just survive relationships; you will go about conquering them.
The power to communicate effectively with people in several scenarios
reveals high social intelligence and communication proficienc y. Behaving
effectively in multiple social situations is the secret to a person’ s personal,
professional and social success.
You can have all the skills, qualification, gifts, technical finesse and
experience.
However , if you are not an effective communicator , you reduce your
success chances, unless you live in a rabbit hole where communication with
people is not required. When we are unable to communicate with others,
our bond of collaborations and associations weakens, thus inhibiting our
success chances or the ability to live a fulfilling and meaningful life.
Effective comm unication, therefore, is one of the biggest secrets to gaining
success in every sphere of life.
Don’ t you as a customer get floored by a customer service representative
who is able to not just understand your concern by keenly listening to you
but also demonstrates empathy and resolves it for you? We all love to be
understood. We love it when people actually listen to us as opposed to
simply hearing what we speak.
According to a research study , enterprises with healthy and meaningful
communication practices outperform their competitors by a good three and
a half times. These are the companies that build solid teams, avoid
misunderstandings, develop efficient customer service, negotiate beneficial
deals and obtain  feedback from their customers – all of which are factors
that contribute to a smoothly functioning business. None of us here is
operating from an isolated island without any human contact. We are
surrounded by people and are constantly engaged in fulfilling their needs
and getting them to fulfill our needs. A powerful, magnetic and engaging
leader can inspire their team to run after their goals. You can get people to
take the desired action if you are an ef fective and compelling leader .
Think about your favorite personality or entrepreneur . There are high
chances that the person you’ve chosen as your idol is a top-class
communicator . Being a top-class communicator doesn’ t imply glib talkers
or smoo th conversationalists. Effective communicators are people who
demonstrate the ability to connect with people through rapport building,
listening and showing empathy . They focus on building meaningful and
fulfilling connections. Communication is as much abou t listening,
comprehending and responding to what the other person is saying as it is
about speaking.
Majority of effective communication in both interpersonal relationships and
business involves around analyzing people, listening to them, observing
them and calibrating our respon ses accordingly . For instance, take a skill
like negotiation, which is a deep communication subtopic within itself. An
ace negotiator is a person who is capable of reading other people like books
and modulating their message to pull things in their favor .
Do you know why some busine sses fall down the wayside in as little as six
months to a year? Because they are solely concerned about making products
and push ing them on hapless customers! It’s a rinse and repeat  the clinical
process until customers get fed up and stop buying. Boom, the business
shuts down! You can have the most awesome idea in the world or the most
ingenious marketing plans anyo ne can think of. However , if your customers
are unable to connect with it, you’re heading towards failure.
To be a top class professional or business person, you have to possess the
ability to get others to listen to you, while also listening to them and
demonstrating understanding or empathy for what they are speaking. This
happens when you speak in a way that resonates with people.
As a profession al, we are constantly dealing with several external and
internal customers. This includes everyone from your managers to
employees to potential customers to clients.
The most important aspect of being a seasoned communicator is that it isn’t
only about you. In fact, effective communication is majorly about your
message’ s recipient. Only talking doesn’ t automatically guarantee that
people will listen. In order to get people to offer you their valuable time,
energy and atten tion, you must be able to pique their curiosity , grab their
attention and offer a clear value . They should be able not just to understand
you but also be able to relate to you. An effective communicator  is someone
people “desir e to listen to ” not “compelled to listen  ” (remember that
boring in teache r in the class whose sessions we had to sit throughout of no
choice?) The sign of a good communicator is someone who people choose
to talk or listen to.
If you do not really identify yourself as a person who is capabl e of holding
an unspoken magnetism or chari sma over people, mate, you are not the only
one. I know plenty of people who are struggling with communication and
social anxiety but who’ve gone ahead and become master communicators
owing to sheer determination and regular practice. There are innumerable
social awkward people around  the world with varying levels of social
anxiety . If you are forever worri ed about people not finding you interesting
enough or not being able to say the perfect things at the perfect time, I was
there too once upon a time. I know the feeling, and so do several others.
You are gripped by a feeling of being judged every second for not being an
engaging conversationalist. You may think people are having a nice laugh
behind your back after you’ve left. I know people who suffer from mild to
extreme social anxiety that manifests itself through physiological symptoms
such as sweating, excessive anxiety , increased heartbeat, higher palpitations
and so on. This isn’t to scare you. This is to tell you that social anxiety and
the inability to communicate is a real issue.
One of the greatest challenges that people with low social intelligence or
ineffective communication skills people grapple with is the ability to
connect or relate to others, when communication with a group of people or
individual, ineffective communicators get a sense of being out of place!
There is a clear feeling of being disconnected and the inability  to relate to
other people.
On the contrary , those will highly developed social intelligence and
communication skills are instantly and effortlessly able to adapt to and
connect with people. They seldo m have a tough time garnering information
about people’ s feelings and emotion to utilize this invaluable knowledge for
forging strong bonds. They are perceptive enough to study other people’ s
communication style and patterns and are seamlessly able to adopt these
styles to enable people to relate to them more ef fectively .
If you identify with the former group, fret not, I have got your back. There
are plenty of people sailing in the same boat looking for enco uragement,
suggestions that work and inspiration, which you’ll find plenty in this book.
This book is written to hold your hand and help you go from  hesitant or
awkward comm unicator to a superstar communicator in a step by step
manner . You won’ t go from being socially awkward to massively popular
overnight. However , you’ll take tiny steps in the direction of self-
assuredness, confidence, and self-esteem to form wonderful relationships
and meet your personal and/or professional goals.
Forming fulfilli ng personal, professional and social relation ships have
multiple advantages. You will enjoy a less stressful life, experience more
positivity in your surroundings, fulfill your goals, spread joy and inspire
people to put in their best, while also increasing your chances of earning
more wealth and enjoying the sweet smell of success.
Chapter 1:
Beating Shyness and Social Anxiety Like a Boss
Let us say, for instance, you want to be a socially confident, self-assured
and charming person, who doesn’ t fear being judged or evaluate d by others.
When you keep telling yourself that you are a confident, fun, self-assured
and charming person, the mind believes it. The thing abou t our mind
(especially the subconscious) is, it doesn’ t differentiate between reality and
aspirations. If you keep saying  you want to be a more sociall y confident
person, the subconscious mind believes you are a socially confident person.
Thus, it drives your actions in alignment with being a more socially
confident person.
A simple shift in your thoughts or the way in which you program your
subconscious mind can bring about a huge transformation in your condition.
Here are a few proven tips to begin with.
Build a mor e practical and r easonable image of others
While you idolize others or look up to them, learn to have in your abilities
too. Others are also susceptible to the same mistakes and shortcomings that
you see in yourself. You really may not know other people’ s weaknesses or
challenges because they may be good at concealing it. This doesn’ t imply
that other people are superior to you or possess greater abilities than you.
Everyone is fighting their limitations and challenges, and no one is perfect.
Have a realistic view of others. They are humans with a set of strengths and
weaknesses, and they falter too. They also make mistakes or go wrong in
their judgment. It is highly unrealistic to believe everyone is superior to you
or better than you.
Look at times when you’ve been better than most people.
Everyone has their own fears just as you have a fear of social situations.
Just because you are afraid of something doesn’ t mean you should be
anxious about it.
Tackle your  inhibitions and fears
Rather than brushing your fears and anxieties under the carpet, address.
Overcome your social phobia by identifying specific situations that cause
your discomfort or duress. Don’ t avoid or be overwhelmed by them if you
truly intend to eliminate these issues.
Avoiding these fears lead to even greater discomfort and phobia, which
magnifies the issue. The more we try to escape from something rather than
tackling it, the more our condition snowballs into bigger issues. Facing your
challenges is the first step towards eliminating them. For example, if a
specific social scenario such as public speaking makes you anxious or break
out into uncontrollable sweat, rather than fearing it, start facing it. Tell
yourself what you stand to lose by not overcoming your fear of public
speaking. You will be unable to share your ideas and inputs with others,
while also hampering the development of business associations.
Avoidance is a painful cycle that leads to greater avoidance rather than
eliminating the issue from its roots. Start gradually by facing yourself in the
mirror while speaking. Work on your speech, posture, gestures, expressions
and voice tone to look and sound more confident.
Notice how you look and soun d. It is really not as bad as you imagine.
Slowly , start addressing a couple of friends or family members in a bid to
overcome your fear of public speaking. Pick a short presentation or speech
that isn’t very complicated to communicate. Use the power of non-verbal
communication to make your public speaking even more impactful. When
you come across as more poised and confident, people invaria bly look at
you in a dif ferent light.
Master power positions or postures that make you come across as more
authoritative and assertive.
Once you gain a little more confidence, start by addressing a small group of
co-workers or acquaintances. Start with easily manageable situations and
gradually move on to the tougher ones. Once you accomplish a tiny victory
in one process, it is easier to conquer other bigger fears. However , you have
to take that one courageous step to begin!
This will not just help you overc ome your social anxiety but also boost your
self-confidence and self-esteem.
Have mor e faith in people
Rather than believing that peop le are always evaluating your negatively ,
approach them from the point of trust. Understand that people’ s intentions
are not questionable all the time.
You may have had instances in the past where people betrayed your trust.
However , attempt to move on from the past by developing greater
forgiveness and tolerance. Understand that a few encounter s with bad
people don’t make the world or everyone bad. There are positive and
negative people, just like there are sweet and rotten apples.
People may also develop a fear for other people and social relationships
when they have been through a damaging relationship or have had their
trust shattered.  However , with time, effort and consistency , one can start
trusting people again.
Here are some tips for building greater trust.
- Be tolerant of other  people’ s mistakes and don’t judge them rigidly
Find a middle way. Show consideration for what others may have gone
through, which has led them to become what they have. Instead of judging
people, try to understand them. When you resist the urge to judge people,
you gradually get rid of the fear of being judged by other people.
- Stay honest
Speak the truth. Inspire other people’ s trust by communicating in a genuine
manner . Once others trust you, you will find it easier to trust them, and the
fear of being judged by them will be gradually eliminated.
- Reach out to people and show them you care by perform ing acts of
empathy and kindness
Don’ t always place your interests above other people. Be around when
people genuinely need you. When people realize you care about their
interests as much as yours, they will trust you. Once they develop trust for
you, it is easier to trust them.
- Don’t seek perfection in people or  yourself
Understand that nothing and no one is flawless. Let go of people’ s
weaknesses and limitations while focusing on their strengths.
Take risks to move outside your  comfort zone
Even tiny risks that help you step outside your comfort zone and try
something that you wouldn’ t normally do can be beneficial when it comes
to beatin g social anxiety . For example, if you don’t normally go for a coffee
break with your co-workers and instead prefer sitting on your desk
pretending to work, try stepping  out for 5-10 minutes during the day. Start
eating lunch with your co-workers, even if it is for a short while. It won’ t
transform you from a socially anxious person to a gregarious and confident
person. However , you’ll take a step in the right direction. Take calculated
and healthy risks. For instance, if you are afraid of meeting new people,
sign up for a blind date.
Small everyday  situations can slowly lead to bigger results. Once you
accomplish or overcome small situations, you’ll begin to realize that it isn’t
as bad as you imagine it to be. In fact, you’ll end up enjoying yourself or
experiencing a warm feeling of relief. This will encourage you to participate
in even more challenging social situations.
Instead of being a place that is comfortable and secure (your couch or
home), go to the park and make some new friends. Play a sport, cycle or
run. Make smal l changes in your routine where you get the opportunity to
meet and interact with new people. Even if it doesn’ t work out, you’ll be
happy you gave it a shot.
If you aren’t a very confident speaker and always avoid speaking in public,
try and proactively volunteer for more speaking opportunities without
worrying about how you’ll fare. Start with small speaking engag ements that
aren’ t very crucial or require you to address a small group.
Take small steps to meet and interact with people who share similar
interests and passions. Train your mind to watch out for clues when people
want to connect  with you. Challenge your thoughts each time they attempt
to preve nt you from doing something. Each time you find yourself fearing
something, start doing it in a small way. You don’t have to go and grab the
stage directly . Start by opening up to a few people or address ing a small
group.
Build your  patience, courage, will-power , perseverance
However tough  it seems, the only way to eliminate your shyness is to
challenge it. It won’t happen suddenly or dramatically in a flash of a few
moments of enlightenment. It is a demanding process that unfolds in a step
by step manner gradually . The idea is not to lose pace.
Each day take a tiny step towards accomplishing your goal of being a more
confident and socially relaxed person with courage and patience. Take note
of the smallest successes so you can continue the momentum with bigger
success stories. Be aware of the fact that just because you suffer from
shyness or social anxiety doesn’ t mean you have to be condemned to a life
of loneliness, misery , and isolation.
You can begin being in the company of others and gradually start
interacting with them until you are able to face social situations in a more
confident manner . Expose yourself to speeches and talks until you are
comfortable, you can do the same. Enlist the help of a therapist if required.
Tell yourself that a majority of people have more to deal with than evaluate
or judge your actions.
Their sole aim in life isn’t to mock you or minutely observe every move of
yours. When you start thinking on these lines, you will start realizing that
people aren’ t preoccupied with you, which will help you relax a bit.
Even if you falter a few times during the process or eliminate your social
anxiety , there’ s no reason to quit. Like we discussed earlier , it won’t happen
overnight. It may take several weeks or months to gradually overcome your
condition. However , have the patience and perseverance to stick around and
so what is required.
Build a more reasonable, practical and balanced pictur e of
yourself
People who suffer from shyness or social awkwardness/anxiety always
believe they are inferior to others. They don’t value themselves enough or
give due importance to their abilities. They don’t have sufficient confidence
in their abilities or potential.
Start believing yourself by developing a more realistic image. You aren’ t
really inferior to all the people, all the time. You are not unworthy of being
loved by other people. Have greater confidence in your abilities and
potential. Each time you find yourself undermining your own potential or
qualities, think about instances when you did something really well. Don’ t
believe things will go wrong all the time before even getting to the
situation. Each time you find yourself indulging in self-criticism, beat it
with evidence that proves the contrary .
Think of all the things you do well. Things go wrong someti mes, which
doesn’ t mean they will always go wrong or that you are never going to be
enough. Avoid making generali zed or sweeping statements such as “I am
really stupid  ” You don’ t have to personalize everything.
Instead of saying “I am stupid  ”, say something like, “Alright, this didn’ t
exactly go as I thought it would. However , I gave it my best and I am
improving with time ”. Take a more realistic approach with your weaknesses
and be appreciative of your strengths. For every new challenge you take up,
there is a 50 percent chance of succeeding, always remember this. It all
depends on your will power and inner strength.
Start by understa nding your true and realistic worth, which won’ t make you
feel inferior to others.
Don’ t seek constant validation from other people about your strengths and
abilities. Keep working on your competencies; learn new skills and practice
being surer of yourself.
Manage your  breath to r egulate emotional r eactions
Practice breathin g and controlling your breath. When you are anxious, you
are often  short of breath or breathe quickly/rapidly . A quicke ned pace of
breath makes the psychological condition even worse. It may cause anxiety ,
hot flashes, sweating, and dizziness.
Therefore you eliminate this shyness or physiological, social anxiety
symptoms by learning to contro l your breath. Start by sitting in a peaceful
place that is free from distractions. Sit in a comfortable and relaxed posture
on a chair or the floor . Focus on your breath. Start counting slowly as you
inhale deeply , following by counting while you exhale deeply .
By chan ging your breathing pattern, you can reverse physical symptoms of
anxiety . A small sift in the breathing pattern, rhythm and rate can trigger
your parasympathetic response. This is nothing but your body’ s powerful
reaction to Emer gency Respo nse, which is referred to as relaxation
response. 
Concentrate on the breath. Learn to breathe easily while controlling the
symptoms of social anxiety or shyness. Each time you find yourself in an
uncomfortable position, focus on the breath. When your thoughts wander ,
acknowledge the stray thoughts rather than fighting them. Get back to your
breath gently after acknowledging these distracting thoughts. Allow the
fresh air to fill your lungs. Controlling your breath gives you the power to
control your thoughts.
Notice how your breath impacts other parts of the body such as mouth,
throat, lungs, abdomen, and stomach.
The idea is to be more mindful of the breath by focusing on it to reduce
symptoms of social anxiety or shyness.
When you are overcome by anxiety , try mastering the technique by lying
down. Later , start breathing in a standing or sitting posture. Break 20
minutes of deep breathing into 4 to 5 shorter relaxation spells  that can be
practiced anytime during the day .
Avoid self-defeatist, damaging and negative thoughts
People who suffer from social anxiety are often overcome by negative
thoughts and feelings, in addition to several prejudices for others and
themselves. This worsens their condition.
They will perpe tually tell themselves things like, “I am so stupid or silly ”
or “I am so awkwar d around people  ” or ”I can never say the right thing in
front of people  ” or “I am a complet e mess around people  ”. They think
everyone else thinks they are stupid or that their voice starts shaking while
conversing with others, especial ly strangers. There is also a feeling that no
one really cares about what they say .
Getting rid of these ideas is critical to the process of recovery . If you want
to live a social anxiety-free life, start working towards replacing these self-
limiting thoughts with more positive ones. You can either enlist professional
help or try to eliminate these thoughts on your own. Identify when and how
these automatic negative thoughts make their way inside your mind.
The next time you take an exam or attend a job interview or thrown in a
social situation, stop thinking about things that can go wrong. Question
your own negati ve thinking patterns. “Am I certain other people think of me
as incompetent or inadequate? Is there any evidence that they hold a
negative opinion  about me? ” Try to refram e your thoughts by giving them
a more positive or realistic twist . Avoid catastrophizing thoughts  or thinking
in extrem e terms. The more realistic and rational truth is things aren’ t as
bad as you imagine them to be. When someone doesn’ t answer your call, it
may not be because they are avoiding you or don’t like you. They may be
busy in a meeting or driving to work.
Shyness or social anxiety originates from a deep-rooted need to imagine the
worst. You always imagine peop le don’t like you or think you are stupid or
perceive you in a highly negative manner . The realistic truth is often far
from it. People aren’ t always evaluating your appearance (unless you are a
reality star or actor) or judging your conversation skills. It is just your
tendency to blow things out of proportion that leads to having such self-
damaging thoug hts. The reality is more balanced and somewhere between
black and white.
Each time you find the monster of negative self-talk showing  up in your
head, talk back to it. When you talk to your inner critic, you take away its
power to control your mind and actions. Telling the critic you don’t want to
listen to what it says makes it powerless. Start to speak and order the critic
to vanish . Tell it that you refuse to listen to it or believe it. Tell it that its lies
have been called out on many occasions. Make the inner critic aware of the
fact that you are demonstrating greater kindness towards yourself, where it
has no place.
One strategy that works wonderfully well when it comes to beating negative
thoughts is to give your critic a name. Then have an ally with another name.
Each time ‘Bunny’  feels the urge to tell you how miserable you are, let
‘Peter ’ intervene and talk about how well you did at the event you last
attended. Allow the ally to offer as much evidence as possible to contradict
everything the critic says.
Make daily r eflection a habit
You hold limitless potential within you that simply needs to be unlocked!
Take time out to reflect upon who you are and what you are capable of
accomplishing. It will help resto re a sense of balance and coherence in your
life. Establish a higher sense of purpose and peace that will make your life
more meaningful.
Set aside a few hours of your day for self-reflection. Ask yourself questions
such as, what is my true potential? What are my positive traits , skills, and
strengths? How can I contribute to make other people’ s lives more
meaningful? What am I capable of accomplishing that I haven’ t yet
accomplished?
Surrender yours elf to these reflections to make your life more  meaningful
and purposeful. It will allow you to focus on the positive instead of
negatives.
Journaling, visualizations, affirmations, and meditation are all powerful
tools of self-reflection. In journaling, you write your thoughts in free-
flowing conscio usness without thinking too much or censoring them. You
write thoughts as they come to your mind while attempting to give them a
more positive direction. In the process, you are programming your
subconscious mind into being a more self-confident and self-assured person
who is at ease in social situations.
You start writin g what you want to accomplish or your goals for yourself.
When you constantly write about what you want to accomplish, you are
tricking your subconscious mind into believing it as the truth. The
subconscious mind is unable to differentiate between imagination and
reality , and henc e directs your actions in alignment with what it believes to
be real.
Write about your goals, desires, and objectives related to social anxiety .
Ensure that you read these goals periodically to keep reminding yourself
about them.
For example, if you keep writing that you are a confident, self-assured
individual; your mind believes it to be true and directs your body to act in a
manner that reveals greater confidence and self-assuredness in social
situations.
Think about instances during the day when you revealed greater self-
confidence or overcame your fear for people or make a small attempt to
face the situation rather than fleeing. It is best to write a journal before
going to bed because when  your conscious mind is resting, the
subconscious mind is in its element. When you think these thoughts just
before sleeping,  you are allowing your subconscious mind to process and
absorb the information.
Our mind has a constant stream of involuntary thoughts running  through it.
The pace is so rapid and undetectable that it becomes difficult to single out
distinct thoughts . It’s pretty much like the background music you hear while
you are working. Though you aren’ t actively focusing on it, it is there
somewhere. We don’t even notice our thoughts, yet they impact us on
multiple levels.
Just like backgro und music impacts your mood, emotions, and state of mind
without you even noticing it, our thoughts have the power to shape our
behavior withou t us realizing it. The involuntary self-talk going on in the
mind can shape your reality in a more positive way if you can reprogram
your mind consciously with more constructive thoughts. Instead of allowing
your self-talk to remain in the background, bring it to the forefr ont and use
it to program your mind in a more positive way to inspire positive actions
that help you beat social anxiety .
Affirmations are positive statem ents that attempt to condition your mind
towards believing positive and hopeful thoughts, thus leadi ng to more
positive actions. Repetition is the key to programming your subconscious
mind. When you keep repeating a thought over and over again, your mind is
tuned to perceive it as your reality . Thus, it guides your actions in sync with
this reality . Here are some affirmations for people suffering from social
anxiety .
Affirmations must always include positive words, must be repeated several
times during the day and must be said in the present tense as if it is already
happening. Also, avoid using negative words in affirmations. For instance,
if you want to say, “I am not socially shy or awkwar d ”, say, “I am socially
confident and effortless  ”.
Replace negativ e words and phrases with more positive terms. This way,
you are not confusing your subconscious mind, which doesn’ t understand
negative terms. By saying, “I am not shy or socially awkwar d ”, you are
only reinforcing  shy and sociall y awkward, the exact opposite of what you
wish to accomplish.
Similarly , meditation is another powerful self-reflection tool. Pick a
meditation style that best suits your purpose. Sit in a relaxed posture and
start by focusing on the breath. Gradually , get into a deeper state of
consciousness by paying attention to your thoughts and body . Focus on
each part of the body and feel the energy within it. Feel a fresh lease of
energy, positivity , and hope within each part of the body .
Start from the head and move gradually downwards until you reach the feet.
Focus on positive reflections, and watch out for your thoughts, feelings, and
words to avoid being swept away by negative thoughts. When you find
yourself overcome by negative, destructive or self-damaging thoughts,
simply acknowl edge them and move back to the positive thoughts and
feelings.
I personally find visualizations very effective when it comes to overcoming
shyness and social anxiety . When you imagine certain visuals, you are again
sending powerful signals to the subconscious mind. Our mind is highly
receptive to visual symbols and often absorbs them more effectively than
words.
Shy and socially anxious people  tend to over focus on the idea that people
are paying atten tion to them or judging them all the time. No, everyone’ s
eyes are not on you all the time. Operating with the thought that all eyes are
on them  and therefore they should speak and act in a specific way only
intensifies the social anxiety .
When you visualize yourself as being a part of any social situation will
trigger feelings of anxiety , shyness or nervousness. Howe ver, if you
visualize the same situation from the point of standing out among the
crowd, you’ll feel more at ease. Don’ t immediately imagine yourself giving
a presentation to the audience. Rather , visualize yourself as the audience to
reduce anxiety .
Visualize yourself as a smart, self-assured and self-confident person. Close
your eyes and relax completely . Turn on soothing music and imagine
yourself in a social situation. Visualize each detail. How do you conduct
yourself in the setting? Visualize yourself as a well-dressed, confident and
popular person who is commun icating with people effectively . Pay close
attention to details such as your attire, body language, mannerisms, speech,
walk, voice, expressions, and posture.
How do you greet new people? How do other people perceive you? What
are others saying to you? Think in terms of sensory experiences. What do
you hear, see, smell, taste and feel? Involve as many senses as you can
within the visualization. Practic e visualization for a few minutes every day
(preferably before going to bed or first thing after rising) . You will
gradually begin noticing the changes it will be about in your persona. You
are feeding powerful symbols to the subconscious mind, which will slowly
align your actions with these thoughts.
If you are afraid of attending an upcoming gathering or event, simply
visualize it before actually attending it. Visualize the situation in detail.
Visualize yourse lf as a friendly , uninhibited and confident person who is
relaxed in the company of others. Imagine how people around you are
acting, reach out to you and socializing with ease. The subconscious mind
will gradually start connecting these images to real life situations, which
will reflect in your attitude. When people observe your attitud e, they will
respond to you more positively .
Visualization is known to be one of the most powerful tools when it comes
to fighting shyness, social anxie ty, and social phobia. Use it in combination
with other techniques for optim al results. For instance, you can combine
affirmations, journaling and visualizations to gradually overcome social
anxiety .
Identify pr oblems and fears, along with their  triggers
By focusing on your problem s and fears, you are actively looking to
eliminate elements that are making your fear or existence even worse.
For instance, if your partner or another family member is constantly
judging, criticiz ing or making uncharitable remarks about you, there are
high chances it can worsen your self-esteem and thus make you even more
fearful of social situations. Similarly , if co-workers are constantly making
unflattering remarks about you, it can lead to an even greater frustration and
social anxiety situation.
By focusing on your problems, you are able to identify triggers that are
furthering harmi ng your condition. It gives you the opportunity  to focus on
a solution – to surround yoursel f with more positive and inspirin g people in
your life who lift you instead of breaking you apart. If something or
someone is augmenting your fear of being judged negatively by others, look
for ways  to avoid the person or situation. By identifying things that make
matters worse, you can focus on solutions.
Chapter 2:
Overcoming Lack of Confidence and the Fear of
Being Judged
If there is one thing that hampe rs the process of effective communication
and prevents us from being our natural, confident and self-assured selves, it
is an ever-loomi ng fear of being judged by others. This is especially true of
people who are shy or suffer from varying levels of social anxie ty. They are
perpetually functioning with a mindset that each time they speak or perform
any action; the other person/people are judging them or secretly mocking
them. The need to avoid leaving behind a negative impression is so
compelling that they stop interacting with people altogether .
People can put themselves throu gh highly self-defeating behav ior to avoid
the possibility of being judged negatively by other people. For starters, you
may elude telling others what you truly desire to tell them. You may avoid
speaking at work, parties or class for fear of ‘not being good enough’  or
ridiculed. You may not tell your loved one your real desires, or you may
hesitate to ask your manager for a raise. You may not want to tell a new
date where you prefer to take them for dinner . The hesitation is arising as a
result of fearing  other people’ s judgment can impact all areas of your life
and prevent you from enjoying more rewarding relationships  by sharing
authentic/genuine ideas, feelings, viewpoints, and emotions. You’ll stop
being yourself and try to be someone you are not just to please the other
person or to avoid being judged by them.
The fear of judgment is deeply connected with the inherent need to be liked
and accepted all the time. This can be psychologically rooted in our
childhood and early adolescen t experience. The need to be liked and
accepted by others is so powerful that it stops us from communi cating in an
uninhibited manner. Thus we are unable to express our true selves in the
process. It is a fact that human beings are forever judging each other . They
are always forming impressio ns about whether they like or dislike
something or whether something is good or bad. Then, there are plenty of
layers in between the two extremes. As we keep processing new
information, our mind is assessing and reassessing things, which is a
continuous process.
Rather than avoiding an issue by not mentioning anything about our
opinions, feeling s or preferences, and working in the direction of pleasing
everyone all the time, try to overcome your own fear of being judged by
people. Accept that the fear exists, and actively work on this fear or anxiety
to tackle the bull by its horns.
Owing to this fear, they are unable to make meaningful conversations,
engage in healthy discussions and enjoy fulfilling relationships with people.
Are you someone who finds it excruciatingly painful to commu nicate with
people for fear of being judged by others? If yes, you aren’ t alone. Here are
some tips on overcoming this fear to facilitate more open, effective and
fearless communication.
Judgments ar e unavoidable
Even the best and most successful people in the world are judged.
Therefore, there  is no escaping  it. Resist the urge to control or influence
other people’ s judgment about you. It will affect the way you communicate
with them. There is only so much you can do to control other people’ s
judgment about you. Don’ t demand that other people shouldn’ t judge you.
It doesn’t help to expect that we should be able to live without being judged
unless you live in a rabbit hole. People have a tendency to judge other
people words, actions, decisions, values, behavior patterns, beliefs, attitude,
and ideologies. They may or not may express it, but they’ll judge. It is a
more physiologi cal human brain process, where we take in information and
process it using our own filters of biases, attitudes, beliefs, ideologies,
prejudices and so on. It is almost an uncontrollable and involuntary process.
While communi cating, make it easier for people to avoid judging you by
sharing the context of your feelings. This will make it easier for people you
are sharing the information with to understand you with the required
understanding and compassion. Compassion is the ultimate judgment killer .
Think of it is judgment’ s very own kryptonite. The two can rarely co-exist.
When compassion, understanding, and sensitivity are around , judgments
have little power . Context offers people the opportunity to unde rstand your
situation with greater empathy by placing themselves in your shoes. Thus,
there is no tendency to judge you.
For instance, if you are telling  someone that your relationship is almost
ruined because your partner is constantly at the receiving end of your
suspicions, also offer some back ground information or context to help them
view things from your perspec tive. In the above example, the listener is
likely to judge you as an over possessive, jealous or suspicious partner .
However , if you mention that you’ve been cheated and lied to in past
relationships, which feeds your fear of being cheated in the current
relationship, the person may understand you more effectively . Give people
enough informa tion to help them see things from your perspective and
avoid making sweeping judgments based on stray facts here and there.
Bring about a shift in your  perception
One way to beat the fear of being judged is to bring about a clear shift in
your perspective in the company of other people. Divert focus  on another
aspect instead of emphasizing on what and how other people are thinking
about you. Try to focus on conversations while also attempting to be in sync
with other people. Understand that much as you’d like to focus on who or
what you are, people do not focus on it.
Even if you say something awkward or your actions are embarrassing in
your opinion, people barely notice them. We may obsess about a small thing
we may have said to someone weeks ago, and unrealistically expect that the
person is still holding on to it pretty much like us. There are high chances
the individual has completely forgotten about it and moved on to other
things. Their memories aren’ t as powerful as you imagine it to be.
During the process of communicating with people, if you experience the
fear of being judged by others, find something to focus on soon . A majority
of times, the fear of being judged isn’t as apparent to the other person as we
think. Focus on some sensory experiences connected to the event to shift
attention from what the other person is thinking about you or how he/she is
judging you. How do your surroundings look, smell and feel? What type of
sounds do you hear? Is there music playing in the background? How does
the food being served taste? This is especially true in social situa tions where
we are always anxious about being misjudged by people we are meeting for
the first time.
This will help divert your attention from the fear symptoms to having a
good time by interacting in a friendly and meaningful manner with the other
person. Lets us assume you are a corporate networking event. Here,
everyone is nervous about making a favorable first impression. Similarly ,
during a recruitment interview , all potential candidates are jittery about
making a favorable first impression and eventually being hired by the
organization.
Understand that irrespective of the situation you are in, almost everyone is
sailing in one boat. This makes it easier for you to deal with your fear of
being judged in certain situations.
Identify your  strengths and weaknesses
When you know your inherent strengths or are confident about what you
are great at, you are less likely to bother about what others think  about you.
The tendency to be affected by other people’ s judgments is far less when we
are confident and aware of our own capabilities. Be self-assured about your
strengths and know your shortco mings better than others. If someone forms
an opinion or judgment about you, they are forming that judgment based on
their filters, which may not have much to do with your own abilities.
When you are aware of your abilities or strengths, other people’ s judgments
will wield less of an impact on your during the process of communication.
While talking to people, be aware of your own strengths, personality
characteristics, and vulnerabilities. This way, the impression others form
about you will not hold much relevance for you. You will continue saying
what you have to in staying true with your own nature. Do not allow others
to kill your individuality , personality , and character based on their
judgments about you.
When you don’t believe in or stand for something, you will tend to believe
everything. Similarly , when you don’t have a clear understanding of your
own personality , strengths, and attributes, you will believe whatever others
think about you. Lack of confidence or self-awareness is the biggest
catalyst for being affected by other people’ s judgments. Take stock of your
own strengths and weaknesses while communicating with people to avoid
going with whatever they want you to believe about yourself. Assume
charge of how you view yourself if you want others to view you positively .
Everything is temporary
You will rarely fear judgments if you realize that nothing about these
judgments or what people think about is permanent. The thing about the
human brain is, it has the capacity to process limited data. Thou gh we make
innumerable judgments, they don’t’ have a place in the memory bank
forever . Howev er much you believe otherwise, people are not going to
remember that one awkward moment of yours forever or every time they
meet you. There  is only so much information one can practica lly retain in
the realms of the brain and conscious memory .
When people make certain judgments or impressions about, there are high
chances that a few days or even  moments later that judgment may have left
their conscious awareness. Our understanding of people is not made based
on the tiny setbacks, awkwardness or mistakes in what they say or do. For
all you know that one moment you thought you were really awkward and
people will remember it for a lifetime, they may forget about it before
saying goodbye to you after the first meeting.
Though an overall impression about people is quickly formed when we
meet them (remember the first four seconds rule?), our understanding of
others is not based on their minor behavior patterns or words. It is more
dependent on a pattern of the schema of big things that others say and do.
There is a patter n in the manner  with which they interact with us and make
us feel over a period of time. This is how we form an impression or
judgment about them. If the overall pattern of your words, actions, and
behavior with other people are positive and favorable, they will not form
negative judgments about you based on one stray moment, a wrong word
used here and there or an awkward action.
The human brain considers a larger perspective in a broader  schema of
things. Thus judgments, opinion s, and perspectives change over a period of
time. It isn’t now and never , however scary it may appear to be. You may
not have a second chance to make a first impression, but during  the course
of your interaction with the person, you do have an opportunity to establish
a pattern.
You ar e not being judged all the while
Keep in mind that this looming  fear of being judged by people every time
exists in your mind and isn’t real. This is a more extreme and unrealistic
type of thinking  that leads us to believe that we are being judged all the
time. A more balanced and real perspective is – no one really gives a damn!
Honestly , people  are more preoccupied (especially if they are meeting you
for the first time) with how other people perceive them than forming
opinions about others. Believe it; people are as nervous about interacting
with you for the first time as you are. A majority of our socia l phobia or
anxiety originat es from the notion that we are being judged all the time.
That’ s far from reality or rational thinking;
People have more on their plate then judging you. This fear of being held
under the microscope for every word and action will prevent you from
communicating with others in a meaningful and rewarding manner .
Bear in mind that others don’t always make you the center of their focus
during the process of communication. They are more often than not
thinking about what to say or do next instead of forming an opinion about
you. Even when  people think about it, they rarely think about you in the
manner in which you think abou t yourself. Try to analyze people’ s thoughts
while communicating with them. What are they implying through their
verbal and non-verbal communication patterns? They seldom perceive you
in the same negative light that you perceive yourself. Take advantage of
multiple social contexts to shift your negative or self-defeatist thoughts.
Stop the cycle of negative thinking in its tracks by performing a physical
action (thinking  biting your tongue or pinching yourself) to snap yourself
out of the thought process.
Once you realize your negative thinking is impeding the process of
communication, get back to communicating naturally and uninhibitedly
with people. Adopt a more neutral communication process if you find it
challenging to make it overtly positive.
Practice challen ging your thoughts by thinking of evidence that is contrary
to what you believe. Is there solid proof that you make a comp lete fool of
yourself every time you talk or interact with people? Is there glaring
evidence pointin g to the directio n that people don’t like to talk to you or are
disinterested in you every single time? Keep thinking on evidence to the
contrary when you find yourself being bogged down by negative thoughts.
Bear in mind that to a certain extent, everyone is anxious while
communicating, especially if they are meeting you for the first time. At
some level, all people struggle with some fear or anxiety of being judged.
Understanding this can help you realize that no one’s judging, ridiculing or
criticizing you all the time. They are in fact dealing with their own fears,
uncertainties, and insecurities, far from being obsessed with judging,
seizing you up or criticizing you at the level you imagine.
Beating the fear of being judged while communicating needs effort and
practice and cannot be overcome in a single day! Develop new thoughts,
behavior patterns, ideas, social skills, and more.
Preparation is the key
The more prepared you are while communicating with people, the lower
will be your tendency to experiencing jitters about what other people think
about you. We saw in the earlier chapter on small talk about how you can
stay up to date with the day’s latest stories or know more about a person
before meeting them. Similarly , if you have a presentation or discussion,
study all facts ahead to support your explanations and arguments. The more
prepared you are while commun icating with people; the lower will be your
fear of being judged negatively by them.
We are more confident, self-assu red and in control of our words and actions
when we know what we are doing. The more we prepare, the more
confident we are while approaching and conversing with people. Keep all
facts, figures, and numbers handy . Have genuine interest to understand
people’ s desires, preferences, likes, interests and so on. Listen to them
carefully to understand what the other person is trying to convey through
both verbal and non-verbal communication.
Practice and preparation reduce your fear of being judged. One of the best
ways to conquer your fear of being judged during the communication
process is to observe how you appear and feel while communic ating. What
are your typical expressions, gestures, movements, posture and so on while
talking to people? How do appear while interacting with other people in
varied situations? Stand facing  a mirror , and pretend to talk to people,
address an audience or make a presentation. How do you look and feel? Do
you feel more confident when you realize you don’t appear as bad as you
think you do? Does facing yourself in the mirror increase your confidence
and sense of self-worth?
If you are going for an interview , practice answering in a perfectly calm,
poised and confident manner . If you are approaching people at a business
networking event, practice talking in a more approachable, open,
welcoming and friendly way. Keep preparing and practicing multiple
communication scenarios before the mirror until you no longer experience
the fear of being judged. Even in the event that people come out guns and
daggers after you, it may not take long for you to take them on in a more
solid, confident and well-prepare d manner . Being confident also awards you
the strength to conquer the fear of being judged.
Keenly consider  your  own judgments  
There’ s seldom a more effective way to stop being bothered by other
people’ s judgme nts than to stop judging yourself and other people. At times,
our fears are imaginary . People who suffer from social anxiety almost
always believe that everyone is judging them. This fear is far from realistic
or balanced. Watch your own thoughts, ideas, language and perception
about yourself. What words do you use while describing yourself? How do
you view  your own words, actions, and behavior? Do you see your own
actions or behavior patterns in a positive or negative light?
Obvious, sometimes judgments are unavoidable. If a perso n has been
terribly rude or means to you, you aren’ t going to think they are angels
incarnated. However , watch the words used in your head for certain people,
behavior pattern s and events. Reframe the focus on your own judgments.
Rather than saying, “someone sucks  ” or “someone is a total loser  ”,
question yoursel f about the effect that person has over you, which you may
want to avoid or gain awareness of in future.
For instance, “He has never followed through with his commitments made
to me ” or “She tells me she’s doing her best but ends up disappointing me
”. Don’ t label people; instead, identify what they do to have a certain
impact over you. Resist the urge to classify people as good or bad character .
Instead, commu nicate in a manner that is healthy for you. If a certain
behavior pattern  on someone’ s part has an unhealthy effect on you, learn to
identify its impact and deal with it instead of labeling people.
Watch the most common words  you use for yourself. If you are constantly
referring to yourself as “loser  ” or “failur e ”, you are as guilty of judging
yourself as others. The biggest barrier to the process of communication is
our tendency to judge ourselves.
That little nagging voice in our head needs to be silenced more than anyone
else. People will have countless opinions, notions, and ideas about you.
They are entitled to their thoughts, and it isn’t much you can do about it.
This is an important step when it comes to overcoming the fear of being
judged by people. If you are forever bogged down by what others are
thinking about you during the process of communication, take stock of your
own confidence, self-esteem, and sense of self-worth.
Identify how your inner critic addresses, and any negative thoughts that it
ignites within you that hamper you from relating to other people. If your
inner critic is constantly telling  you that you are a fool when it comes to
trusting people owing to a few bad experiences, you will not be able to trust
people while conversing with them. Your beliefs and negative comments
about yourself will lay the ground for your communication  with other
people, so watch what you say to yourself.
Know how much you contribu te to the fear of being judged during the
process of communication. What role does the filter of your own negative
thoughts play when it comes to your fear of being judged? Take control of
your actions, thoughts, and beliefs to start making small shifts in your
perspective or thought process. Stay positive and optimistic  instead of
worrying about what others think about you.
Chapter 3:
Secrets of Small Talk and Conversation Building
No One Will Tell You
Now that we’ve tackled shyness/anxiety and the ever-looming fear of being
judged in social situations, let us move on to another effective
communication and rapport building secret –small talk and breaking the ice
with strangers in social situations. Why is small-talk so vital when it comes
to mastering social skills?
Small talk can, indeed create big magic when it comes to wow ing people
and building lasting relationships. There is something about people who
have mastered small talk. They  are charming, irresistible and possess the
knack of sweeping people off their feet instantly . This magnetism and
charisma help them climb dizzy heights of popularity . Have you ever
noticed how some people almost always manage to be crowd pullers at
every party or event? These are the glib talkers who make people feel
comfortable and engrossed in a conversation.
All of us know someone who slays it when it comes to connecting with
others or building a favorable rapport. The person knows precis ely what to
say and how to say it for creatin g the desired effect. How do they manage to
capture people’ s attention every single time? Small talk or making
conversation is not an inborn trait. It is something the person has mastered
over a period of time, and you can too! They make it seem effortless and
smooth. It seems like these savvy conversationalists can never say anything
wrong.
What is this secret for being an incredible people magnet that small talk
experts have mastered and others do not know? Trust me; there’ s no magic
wand or genie involved. There are high chances these people have
painstakingly studied and conquered the art of building a rapport with
others through the power of small talk. Small talk can be huge when it
comes to building a favorable rapport with people and conn ecting at a
deeper or more subconscious level.
A study has revealed when we meet someone for the first time; it takes the
person only 4 seconds to build an impression about us, which largely stays
the same  throughout our future interactions with them. Think about it; you
have only 4 seconds to make a positive impression on people. Sounds
scary? The idea is to give people a sense of belongingness and affiliation, to
make them feel comfortable in your company and to make the first
interaction memorable.
Studies at Michigan University have demonstrated that small talk and
thoughtful interactions increase our problem-solving mechanisms.
Constructive and meaningful communication comprises getting a hold of
other people’ s thoughts and trying to look at things from their perspective.
This is vital when it comes to considering a problem from different angles
and coming to a solution. It helps people develop strateg ic thinking,
problem-solving skills, and lateral thinking.
Did you think about why some people are almost always successful when it
comes to making friends, grabbing complimentary drinks at the bar, making
unfor gettable conversation and generally sweeping others off their feet? The
answer is simple words is – small talk. It is indeed critical when it comes to
making a favorable first impression and getting them interested in
interacting with you more often.
Yes, small talk seems like a mammoth task to some people. They break into
a sweat when it comes to approaching strangers or initiating a conversation
with unknown people. The ice-breaking gives them jitters, and they believe
they will make a complete fool of themselves. The fact remains that you
don’t have much  time to create a first impression, and whatever you say or
do can break or make that crucia l initial interaction. Small talk is indeed the
foundation of every fulfilling and rewarding personal, social and
professional association. We form mutually rewarding and beneficial
relationships on the basis of a favorable first impression or connection
establishing small-talk.
The objective of small talk is to show the other person how interesting,
well-informed and credible you are as an individual. It is also related to
rapport building, creating a common ground to feel a sense of oneness or
belongingness with the other person and for supporting future interactions.
By engaging in small talk, you can successfully determine if the people are
indeed worthy of associating with you in future for building more
meaningful, rewarding and beneficial social, professional and personal
associations. At times, causal small-talk can lead to lasting relationships
with folks who are similar to you or in a similar situation as you.
Bedazzle people by building a positive first impression using these
incredibly helpful small talk rules.
Mirr oring
If there is one powerful tip that has existed since primordial times for
building rappor t and feeling a sense of oneness with a person, it is
mirroring. It is the key that helps us establish a positive rapport with other
people at a subconscious level. Mirroring has been in place throughout
evolution and is still one of the best ways to get people to like you or feel
that you are ‘one among them.’  The human brain is wired to identify people
who are similar to them. We are invariably drawn or attracted to people who
appear to be similar to us. There is an instant connection with people who
are similar to us or like us at a highly subconscious level.
The best way to make a person feel that you are similar to at a deeper ,
subconscious level without them even noticing it is to simply mirror their
actions, words, gestures and so on. If you are on a mission to build a
favorable impression on someo ne you have just met, mirror their actions,
gestures, movements, voice, choice of words and posture. Carefully notice
their non-verba l and verbal signals, and mirror it for creating feeling
belongingness, likeability , and familiarity .
An expert tip is to keep your mirroring actions subtle and discreet to avoid
giving the other person the impression that you are mimicking them. Use
this technique for leading peop le to think that you are just ‘one among
them’  or like them. This not just increases your likeability factor but also
helps build a favorable rapport with anyone.
All you have to do is smartly identify the most words or phrases  used by the
person and drop them subtly while talking to them. For instance, if you find
someone calling  their business as their “empir e ”, use the same  word when
you refer to their business. What happens when you do this? On a highly
subconscious level, this increases your chances of getting the person to not
just like you or feel a sense of oneness with you but also relate  to you on a
deeper plane, thus leading to a glowing first impression.
Bear in mind that the mirroring should look natural, subtle and effortless. It
shouldn’ t appea r forced or like you ate trying to make a huge effort to get
into someone’ s good books. Avoid looking nervous about identifying and
aping every action or gesture the person makes. This will defeat the entire
purpose of this strategy . This not just boosts your appeal but also facilitates
the process of helping people bond with you more efficiently . People will
respond and relate to you more favorably when you pitch yourself as a
person who they are able to identify with.
Avoid discussing unknown, unfamiliar  or complex topics
It can be awesome to have a discussion about space science with a space
researcher or scientist. However , it is always safe to go with subjects you
are comfortable discussing or familiar with.
This gives you the much-neede d confidence when it comes to making a
favorable first impression on people. Why talk about known topics? You are
already running low on confidence and slightly inhibited by the prospect of
meeting new people or not saying the right things. If you start venturing
into unfamiliar terrain, it will lower your confidence even more.  The person
you are interacting will have a certain edge over you, which will nosedive
your confidence levels, while also making your ignorance obvious. This can
lead to an unflattering first impression. You will rarely recover from saying
something dumb or sounding downright stupid, thus impactin g the entire
conversation. It is nice to talk about varied topics but avoid picking topics
that make you appear clueless and ill-informed. Throwing half baked details
just to impress people makes you come across as pretentious and fake. An
expert can easily call your bluf f if you don’ t know what you are saying.
When someone is talking about a topic that you don’t know anything about,
avoid bluffing your way simply to gain attention. Rather , employ self-
deprecating humor to genuinely admit something such as, “All I know about
space is the one that exists between my bedroom and refrigerator  ” if you
know nothing about space research or science while talking to someone
who is deeply interested in these topics or a professional. Isn’t it better to be
appreciated for your humor than be the butt of all jokes for your lack of
knowledge or ignorance? You’ll appear more genuine, realistic, natural and
confident when you can laugh at your own shortcomings. Learn to convert
weaknesses into strengths. Lack of knowledge can be cleverly utilized for
making yourself look more genuine, honest, less mechanical, more relatable
and entertaining.
Do not be shy about helping people enjoy a good laugh at your expense;
you will not just appear more honest and less fake but also discard the
opportunity for other people to laugh at you or take a dig at your
shortcomings. It’ll increase your confidence by several levels.  People are
more blown away by witty and self-assured people who possess the
confidence to admit to their weaknesses than fake folks who attempt to
demonstrate their foolishness by sharing half-baked information.
Use open-ended questions
We’ve discussed this earlier in the active listening chapter . It works like a
charm when it comes to making small talk and getting to know people.
Getting someone  to open up about themselves is quite an art, and the secret
is to ask more open-ended questions. This will not just allow the other
person to open up about themselves but also helps you identify a common
ground for enjoying a memorable conversation. Avoid making it a one-way
communication. In fact, start by offering some interesting information about
yourself and then ask the other person. Don’ t play FBI asking lots of open-
ended questions without sharing information about yourself.
Try to maintain  a balance between sharing something of your own and
subtly getting the other person to talk by asking open-ended queries to get
to know them. It’ll be a more interesting balanced conversation and appear
less intrusive or interrogative. For instance, let us say someone is excited
about an upcoming games season in the city. You can begin the
conversation for talking about it. You can ask the person why they support a
specific team or what makes them want to join a particular team.
Here are some examples. Perso n 1 – Have you heard about the season’ s
upcoming games in xyz city? Person 2 – Oh yes, everyone is stoked about
it. I am cheering for team ABC, what about you? Person 1 –Oh, I am
supporting team  IJK Person 2 – what makes you support IJK? Person 1 –
They have a strong defense, and I am also a huge fan of player G. Person 2-
Oh yes, that’s right. Have you played the game ever? Person 1 – Oh yes, I
used to play for the varsity and the local city team as well for many years
before quitting owing a back injury . Person 2 – This is impressive; can you
share your winning strategies, please?
So here someon e has started the conversation, and as Person 2, you are
simply building upon it. You get the drift, right? The objective  is to create
conversation by giving some details about yourself and asking people
questions to ensure a more freely and smoothly flowing conversation or
information exchange.
Effective conversationalists are expert in recognizing other ’s interests, key
drivers, emotion al hot buttons and passions. They know exactly what drives
people, and how to steer the talk in the right direction. These
communicators pin down peop le’s emotional hot buttons and make the
conversation sticker by talking about things that the other person is
interested in or can relate to. If you listen to seasoned conver sationalists,
you’ll understand that they are savvy people who are adept at identifying
the other person’ s interests pretty early during the interaction. Not just that,
they’ll also build  upon it until the other person is passionately engaged and
involved in the conversation.
Let us say, for example, you realize that a person is an avid traveler and
adventure buff. This valuable information can be harnessed in several ways
for rapport build ing. You can begin by talking about your own travel and
adventure sports activities while  urging them to share their most memorable
trips and adventure memories. You can speak about your experiences with
different culture s and regions. Ask them about their most memorable
vacation. Or a funny travel story . This is one way of making room for an
engaging conversation that keeps people enthralled and hooked.
Stay abreast with the day’s news befor e going for a gathering
or networking event
This is one of the best tips when it comes to conquering small talk like a
boss. Before attending an important gathering, networking event or party ,
stay abreast with the day’s latest news, events, and happenings. It helps to
stay well-informed and up to date with what is happening aroun d you while
making small talk. This makes you come across as an intelligent , interesting
and articulate person. Just before you head towards the vent, dedicate a few
minutes for browsing through the day’s important news stories. Use this for
creating a “conversation starter bank  ”. You have all the matter you need to
initiate an engaging conversatio n instead of being at a loss of words or not
knowing where to begin. You can simply start with any one of the ready
topics and open the door for an interesting, meaningful and memorable
conversation.
Ensure that you do not go after controversial topics related to politics,
international conflict, and debatable global affairs. Instead opt for relatively
safe subjects such as a breakthr ough in medical or technological research,
new scientific trends and so on, where there is little scope for the difference
in opini on. You don’t want to start World War 3 in a ballroom, do you?
When you keep a conversation bank ready , it ensures there aren’ t any
awkward minutes of silence or pointless fillers. This helps you keep other
people completely hooked to the talk!
Maintain a balance between asking questions and making
statements
Small talk should be a nice balance of statements and questions. If you pose
too many questions, you may come across as intrusive and probing.
Similarly , if you go on and on by making too many statements, the other
person will not have an opportunity to speak!
Keep the intera ction more balanced, relevant and meaningful  by mixing
statements and questions. Begin  by making some statement and include a
question at the tail end. For instance, “I genuinely enjoyed ABC televis ion
series although plenty of people  thought it was it over hyped. What is your
opinion about it? ” You are offering your opinion, while also giving the
other person a chance to express their take.
Go with universal, non-contr oversial and neutral subjects
When you are talking to someon e for the first time or initial few times, as a
thumb rule, go with more neural, evergreen and universal topics . Don’ t pick
culturally , religiously and politically sensitive topics where peop le can have
diverse views. This is even truer when you are talking to people from
diverse nationalities, cultures, races and so on. What are some safe and
evergreen topics? Environment, movies, local city, health, and medical
research, techno logy, weather , books, science and so on. Avoid talking
about war, political ideologies, religious differences, terrorism, and global
conflicts.
Try to figure out common ground and stick to it throughout the
conversation. For example, if you realize that the person you are interacting
with is an avid foodie, go with topics such as new eateries in town, popular
city regional foods, international delicacies, and other similar food-related
topics. Then again, if you realize  that someone is a big sports fan, talk about
weekend games , best places for games buffs to go to within and around
town and winning game strategies. I am willing to bet my last cent people
will be all charged to make an enthusiastic, spirited and engaging
conversation.
Many luxury vehicle salespersons are actually trained to identify their
potential custom er’s interest so that they can build upon it to strike a
favorable rappor t. For example, if they come across gym equipm ent or gear
in the vehicle, the salespeople will start talking about their cardio training
sessions or weight training routine. They will offer muscle building tips or
discuss healthy eating. The aim of this strategy is to boost the salesperson’ s
likeability , build  a positive rapport, leave behind a stellar first impression on
the prospective customer , which boosts their chances of selling to a
potential customer .
Disagr ee in a healthy and r espectful manner
While making small talk, you may not agree with everythin g the other
person says. However , learn to disagree in a healthy , balanced and
respectful mann er without getting offensive, aggressive and confrontational.
This will damage your chances of creating a positive impres sion on the
other person. Use a more diplomatic and genuine approach such as, “This is
a novel, differ ent and interesting  way of looking at it or conside ring things.
I never thought about it this way. Can you elaborate?  ” Now, this approach
will keep things pleasant while  still showing disagreement. A potentially
volatile situation can quickly turn into one of constructive and healthy
discussion. Learn to spot potentially negative conversations and quickly
change them into pleasant interactions by using a more balanced approach,
where you can make your point  without offending the other person. Being
assertive without coming across  as aggressive in your interaction s is the key
to be an ultra-e ffective communicator . Aggression is, “I am always right
and you are always wrong ”, while  assertiveness is, “I have the right to be
my view and so do you. Let us agree to disagr ee without changing our views
”.
Ask for  suggestions, r ecommendations, and advice
This is my absolute favorite when it comes to acing the ‘small talk creates
big wonders game.’  One of the best ways to help people feel a sense of
belonging, similarity , and affiliation with you is to show them feel
important (we’v e discussed this briefly in above). Oscar Wilde famously
said, “We admir e the wisdom of people who come to us for advice  ”. People
will automatically believe you are impressive, smart and have great
discretion if you approach them for suggestions, guidance, advice, and
assistance. Don’ t you appreciate the wisdom and good sense of people who
come to you for advice, opinion or suggestions? Use this inherent human
tendency to establish a favorable rapport and facilitate the process of
communication. When you approach a person for advice or suggestions,
they will not just feel wonderful about themselves but also view you are
someone who possesses great taste.
People normally love speaking about themselves unless they have a more
reticent or reserved persona. They are most comfortable while talking about
their experience s, expertise, passions, and knowledge. You’ll get them all
charged and pumped up if you ask them for suggestions related to their area
of passi on or expertise. Research has demonstrated that talking about
ourselves helps us feel great and stimulates the same hormones that are
activated when we make love or eat delicious food. Now that you know the
secret to making inroads into a person’ s consciousness by leavi ng behind a
positive impress ion, use it to the hilt. Keep learning new things or gaining
interesting insig hts from other people. They will have no option  but to find
you an irresistible communicat or. When you are stuck for topics to talk
about, simply ask people for suggestions and opinions.
Always r emember  people names
Have you read Dale Carnegie’ s communication and social relationships
bible How to Win Friends and Influence People?  One of the best strategies
mentioned in the book when it comes to leaving a favorable impression on
people is remembering their name and using it many times throughout the
interaction. In many social situations, when we are introduced to people,
there are rapid introductions, where lots of names are shared, and unknown
faces are to be remembered. It can be a challenge to recall  everyone’ s
names. When so many details are exchanged, you may not remember these
names later. Use this as an advantage and pick up as many names as you
can by mindfully listening to people when they share their names. When
you take people’ s names in the interaction, they’ll be mighty impressed you
remember it.
Get into the habit of memorizi ng everyone’ s names. One technique is to
repeat it after being introduced to the person. For instance, “Hi, I am Joe ”.
“Hey Joe, wher e do you work?  ” or “Hey Joe, nice to connect with you here
” or “Hey Joe, are you also Sam’ s friend?  ” Keep  repeati ng their name
naturally until you commit it to your long-term memory . However , don’t
sound stupid by repeating over and over like a stuck record. Taking names
should appear to be subtle and natural.
Don’ t we all feel special, wond erful and valued when someone addressed
you with your name? It adds a more intimate and personal touch to the
interaction. Doesn’ t it offer you a wonderful sense of importanc e when you
realize that someone managed to remember your name despite being
introduced to several people? Doesn’ t it make the communication more
appear more connection-worthy when someone addresses you by your
name? Avoid feeling awkward about addressing people using their names
even if they have only been introduced to you.
Using someone ’s name makes you appear more likable, irresistible and
relatable. If you didn’ t catch someone’ s name, it is fine to gently ask them
to repeat it rather than addressing them using an incorrect name.
Have the discussion or  talk focus on the other  person
Top conversationalists understand that small talk and building a glowing
impression on others is centerin g the interaction around them. Make others
the epicenter of your conversations rather than focusing on yourself.
However , if you get a feeling that the other person isn’t comfortable with
the spotlight shining on them or he/she appears socially awkwar d, shift your
focus from them till they begin feeling comfortable to open up.
Few people enjoy listening to folks who only talk about themselves, and
their accomplishments, talents, positions and so on. Of course, you are
impressed but it gets boring after a while. I mean, there’ s only so much you
can hear about other people. There isn’t any need to explain your life in
excruciating detail to strangers, including what your neighbor ’s dog ate for
breakfast. Big no-no! Focus on others. This makes appear less self-centric,
self-assured and likable.
Use greater “You ” than “I ” statem ents through the conversation. This will
help people understand you are keen on knowing more about then instead
of yapping nineteen to the dozen about yourself. Show that you are
genuinely interested in other people. Listen to them attentively and
mindfully by observing verbal as well as non-verbal clues. This makes you
come across as irresistible.
Include personal stories, anecdotes, experiences and metaphors
Charismatic communicators know how to sweep listeners off their feet by
sharing likable, relatable and interesting personal experiences and
anecdotes. They make every interaction or conversation memorable by
sharing stories from their life or revealing to the other person how they have
been in a simila r situation. It makes these people appear more relatable,
likable and identifiable. This strategy also helps create a foundation for
building more meaningful relationships.
Sir Paul McCartney utilized this strategy brilliantly when it came to be
developing a rapport with the performance before each live performance.
The musician would go about offering a background story or inspiration
behind a particu lar song or share  a fascinating behind the scene anecdote or
incident while the song was being created. This added greater charm to his
performance. Another wonder tip for being an ace conversationalist is to
utilize rhetorical questions generously throughout the interaction. Are you
having a wonderful time? Do you know this powerful secre t related to
ABC? It keeps the listener totally hooked to what you are saying by
building anticipation.
One power -packed tip followed by effective communicators is using
contrast for communicating their ideas in a more persuasive manner . For
example, statem ents like, “we are concerned about the value we provide to
our customers  ” can be delivered in a more compelling way by using the
element of contrast along the lines of, “While our competitors and other
companies focus  on low prices, we concentrate on offering greater value to
our customers  ”. The contrast makes what you are attempting to express,
appear more power -packed, thus leaving the other person thinking.
Metaphors are another powerful arsenal in n effective communicator ’s bag.
They make for effective conversation elements since they stimulate the
listener ’s sense of imagination, and form more vivid imagery of what he/she
is attem pting to convey . As a speaker or communicator , you can stir the
perfect feelings,  imagery , and emotions in people by employing metaphors.
Keep a few meta phors ready for common topics of conversation, situations,
and ideas. Go online and find metaphors for some of the most common and
complicated topics. As a communicator , you can make your point more
compelling when you are able to help your listener understa nd complex
topics by using simple, everyday metaphors.
Do some r esear ch gr oundwork
I know someone who is an incre dible social magnet and has folks eating out
of his hands. One of the most awesome tips I’ve learned by observing him
is finding interesting little detai ls about someone’ s background just before
meeting them. It’s like a piece of quick background information,  which isn’t
really tough in the digital age. This technique may not always be possible.
However , if you know the name  of the person you will be meet ing, it helps
to do some background research.
When you are aware that you are going to meet ABC or a group for the first
time, do some digging to gather information. This will help you build a
more rewarding and meaningful interaction with the person.
For example, let us say you are attending some social gathering, where you
know you will find plenty of musically inclined folks. You know the
gathering will make have people with a specific interest or passion. Thus,
you can dig deep into knowing more about various musical forms, latest
chartbusters and more. This will help you come across to date and, well-
informed, likabl e and exciting about a topic that is of interest to plenty of
people.
Recognize things that echo with people in the group or gathering and use
this valuable information to enjoy stimulating conversations with them.
Folks you have just met will completely hook into what you are saying
because they are passionate about the topic. At times, enjoy playing
Sherlock Holme s and looking for clues about what a drive s a person
through their social footprints. Don’ t being a virtual stalker . It’s just some
harmless digging around for knowing more about the person, so you know
what to talk to them when you meet them. Go through the person’ s profile
on social networks for understanding their background, profession, interests
and so on. You’ll gain a good idea of people’ s personality to connect with
them using favorite spots, teams, interests, television series, likes,
preferences and more for keeping people enthralled throughout the
conversation.
Know more about people before meeting them to give yourself a clear edge
over others when it comes to rapport building. However , guard against
being judgmental or holding preconceived notions about people before
meeting them. The idea is to facilitate communication, not hamper it. Keep
an open mind while knowing more about people and approaching them.
Develop superior  listening skills
Communication is a two-way process that involves talking and listening. It
isn’t merely about revealing your superior listening skills but also about
practicing active listening by plugging into what other people are saying.
Speaking is integral to the communication process. However , if you don’t
keenly listen to people, you will find it challenging to connect with them or
adapting to their communication style, communication needs, emotions,
personality , and intentions and so on. A superstar conversationalist is not
someone who can talk until their jaw hurts. It is also about knowing where
people come from and appropriately responding to what they say. Make
others feel relaxed, open and comfortable in your presence.
When you want to sweep peopl e off their feet and leave behind a dazzling
impression, offer them complete attention when they are talking. Your body
language should be more responsive and open and less rigid. Avoid crossing
your legs and arms and tilt your head slightly in the person’ s direction when
you are addressing them. Keep your feet firmly pointed towards the
speaker . Subconsciously , it tells the other person that you intere sted in what
they are saying and not looking to escape from there. 
Give plenty of verbal as well as non-verbal acknowledgments to
demonstrate that you are listeni ng to people. For example, nod your head,
say “aha ” or “I know how you feel ”. Ask meaningful questions or
paraphrase what  the other person  said to show your interest in what they are
saying. People need acknowledg ments that you are listening to them if you
want them to open up.
Avoid sharing increasingly personal/intimate details while
engaging in small-talk
This should be a given, but it is amazing how many people manage to break
this unsaid small-talk communi cation rule. While some folks take time to
open up, other people are quick in recounting the last several decades of
their life in 10 minutes. There is no need to open up about everything in a
bid to establish a favorable rapport with strangers. Doesn’ t it drive you nuts
when people launch into an autobiographical mode, sharin g the most
intimate details about their lives with someone they barely know? Spare
people painful details about your troubled childhood or rebellious teens!
However , I know small talk and communication experts always suggest
sharing some details about yourself to break the ice and establish a
favorable rapport with the other person. The middle way is to share enough
interesting tidbits to what the other person’ s appetite or pique their curiosity
but not veer in the territory of the intimate details.
Share interesting pieces of information about yourself without appearing
weird freaky . Hold back the urge to share intimate, personal or confidential
information during small-talk. Remember , the person is still a stranger until
you get to know them well. Ever yone doesn’ t have the same threshold when
it comes  to sharing personal details. Some people may not be comfortable
talking about their personal life or hearing about yours.
Also, you face the risk of this information being misused by the other
person. Another big no-no is gossiping or bad-mouthing others (especially
common friends  or people known to both you and the other person). It
depicts a pathetic picture of you as a person. You will come across as
someone who cannot be trusted  to retain other people’ s secrets  or a person
who is constantly talking behind the backs of other people.
No conversation clues? Scan your  surr oundings
At times , when you don’t know  what to say or are stuck for clues (your
biggest fear maybe the conversation coming to a dead end), the best
strategy is to look at your environment for clues. It can be anything from a
tune playing in the background to wall art to something someone is wearing
or even a broch ure lying around. There are clues everywhere,  which you
can pick up to start a stimula ting conversation. All you need to do is
observe your surroundings carefully. Keep an eye around you to kick-start
an engaging and interesting discussion. How do you know if a person wants
to talk about a topic? Again, observe how they react to what you’ve just
said, and then determine your next course of action. For example, when you
talk about the long line at the buffet table, what is the other person’ s
reaction? Does he/she look like they want to speak more about it, or do they
simply smile and shrug it of f?
One thing to keep in mind while using this small talk and communication
technique is to pick topics that are positive, appropriate for the occasion or
person and relev ant. Avoid talking about irrelevant and inappropriate topics
that border on gossip or negativity . The other person will end up garnering
an unflattering impression about you. Feel-good topics are the best when it
comes to enjoying a memorable and engrossing conversation.
If you are new to a city, you can ask locals for suggestions about places to
visit or dine at. People instantly  take to those who ask them for advice and
suggestions because it gives them a sense of importance. In a way, you
place them on a pedestal and make them feel valued. They will end up
thinking you are smart (since you asked them) and feel an instant
subconscious connection with you.
You’ll open an entire box of topics by soliciting suggestions from people. It
will start an engaging conversat ion about a variety of things, including city,
culture, arts, music, food, attractions, sports, communities and more. It’s
like unlocking a treasure chest of conversation goodies! Few people dislike
talking about the place they grew up or live in.
When seasoned conversationalis ts don’t know too many people  at a social
or business gathering, they will use connection builders such as, “How do
you know the hosts, Michael and Angela?  ” This gives us a platform to
identify a common ground for starting a meaningful conversation.
The 20-second rule
If you are stuck between how much to speak and how much to listen during
your small talk sessions, stick to Dr. Mark Goulstan’ s 20-second rule from a
book he’s written called, Just Listen.  Mark doles out a practical, realistic
and actio nable solution that can be compared to following traffic rules. This
is how it goes – during the first 20 seconds of speaking, you are operating
on a green light. The listener will actively listen to you only if you make
appropriate, engaging and relatable statements. You have 20 seconds to
pique their interest and get them to listen to you.
It is very rare to be able to hold people’ s attention beyond the initial 20
seconds. Only a few gifted conversationalists are able to accomplish this.
Very few people are able to hold someone’ s attention while they are
speaking for more than 30 seconds without appearing boring or chatty . The
subsequent 20-second window is when your yellow light begins. You have
now gone beyond the limit. After 40 seconds, you are in the red-light
window . Stop in your tracks right here and don’t go any further . I know you
are not going to keep looking at your watch while conversing with people.
However , a quick glance shoul d help you figure out the duration of your
talking time. The urge to contin ue can be overpowering. However , if you
are approaching 40 seconds, wind up quickly . Give the other person a
chance to speak.
Once you give the other person sufficient time to speak, get back to talking
if the person is still interested in listening to you. Try and keep your talking
and listening time equally . This creates a good balance when you are
communicating with someone. Both you and the other person feel heard.
Killer  conversation starters
You will never have a dearth of conversations if you master these clever and
engaging conversation starters. I know and empathize with people who get
stuck while approaching new people because they don’t know what to say
or how to make the conversation  more interesting. When you are at a loss of
words, and the conversation faces the prospect of reaching a dead-end, here
are some ways to revive it.
1. Wher e are you originally from? Is it far from where you currently live?
How is the weat her in your nativ e city? How is life back in your hometown
in comparison with the current place of residence? If given an option,
would you conti nue living in your native town/city or your current place of
residence? Get people to talk about their birthplace to create a warm and
fuzzy feeling and make the conversation more memorable.
People almost always associate  their birthplace with positive feelings, and
the same feel-good factor they experience during the conversati on can help
subconsciously transfer these feelings to you. This association is exactly
what plays out when we exper ience certain feelings about hearing some
songs. There are high chances we heard the song during a particular time in
our life when we were under going certain emotions or experienc es, which is
why playing the song or piece of music evokes the same emotions in us.
Similarly , talking to people about a positive, fuzzy or feel-goo d topic will
facilitate the rapport building process and boost your likeability factor .
2. What  are the top three items sitting on your bucket list currently? What
are your travel plans for the current year (if the person mentio ns travel as
one of their passions or hobbies)? Which places have you been to? Which is
your favorite holiday memory? Which is your favorite holiday destination?
There are plenty of questions you can ask about a person’ s passions,
interests, and hobbies to build conversation ef fectively .
3. Which television or Netflix series are you currently hooked on to? Why
do you enjoy watching it? Which television series or movie comes closest
to your life? If offered a choice to live in the setting of your favorite book or
television series , which would you pick? The idea is to get the other person
to open up and engage in an interesting conversation.
4. Which is the latest movie or television series you’ve watched? What did
you like or dislike most about it? Do you recommend it? Is it worthy of all
the hype it has generated?
5. You remind me of a celebrity but can’t figure out whom. Which well-
known person do people generally compare you to?
6. Which was the last concert you attended? How was the entire
experience? Which is your favorite musical band? What kind of music do
you like listening to?
7. Why did you choose to be in this professional or opt to work in a specific
sector? Did you aspire to be here from the beginning? Were you always
interested in being (their profession)? How did you develop a passion for
working in this sector? Would you recommend this choice of career to your
children or other aspiring professionals?
8. Hey, how do you know Jane and Joseph, the hosts? How did you hear
about this gathe ring or event? How did you join the Federatio n? In short,
you are asking the other person rather politely how they landed up there.
Any questions that pertain to their presence, there can be good icebreakers
to kick start a memorable conversation.
9. What is the highlight of your day? What do you like doing in your free
time? Which is your favorite sports team? What are your hobbies, interests,
skills, and passion?
10. Which are some of the city’s best places to hang out? Which attractions,
eateries, parks, cafes, museums and so on are worth visiting in the city?
These are just a warm up to get you started with the conversation. Keep
building on the conversation to make it more interesting and engaging.
Chapter 4:
How to Use Voice, Speech, and Language for
Being a Pro Communicator and Influencer
Don’ t you wish to be a super influential and effective communicator who
has people eating out of your hands? In an earlier chapter , we discussed the
finer nuances of conversation and how it can help us break the ice while
sweeping people  off their feet. This chapter is dedicated to exploring how
we can effectively use the power of speech, language and voice skills to
boost our charisma and confidence for being an ef fective communicator .
Are you expressing yourself in a positive, compelling and confident
manner? Are you an articulate and engaging communicato r? Are you
expressive and confident when  it comes you addressing an audience? A
powerful communicator possesses several attributes, which can be mastered
over a period of time. While non-verbal communication is integral to the
process of being an effective communicator , we focus primarily on verbal
communication in this chapter . What are the elements of an amazing
conversation or speech? It comprises several characteristics such as
intonation, tone,  inflection, words and much more to lend greater meaning
and clarity to your message for helping you communicate articulately .
Here are some power -packed tips for boosting your language skills to come
across as an interesting, persuasive and ef fective communicator .
Maintain an even paced and steady rate of speech
Your rate of speech is the speed with which you speak.
Have you observed how some people speak so fast that you can barely grab
what they are trying to communicate? Similarly , some people speak so
slowly that you are bored to death until they finish speaking. If you want to
be an effective communicator , maintain a steady , consistent and well-paced
rate of speech. It should neither be too fast nor too slow. People who speak
very fast, often come across as anxious, nervous, emotional, dramatic and
dominating. Similarly , when you speak too slowly , you come across as
inhibited, indeci sive and confused. The listener may soon switch off either
way when they cannot effectively process what you are trying to
communicate.
The middle path is to talk neither too fast nor too slow. Keep a balanced and
steady rate of speech of around 140-160 words per minute. Time yourself
while you speak  at your normal pace and check your rate of speech. If you
go abov e 160 words per minut e, buddy people are going to have a tough
time keeping up with what you are saying. Make it easy for your listeners to
process what you are saying by keeping a uniform rate of speech.
When you make  a very importa nt or substantial point, where you want the
idea to sink into your listener ’s consciousness or make them think for a
while, pause after saying it, this will create the desired effect. Give them
time to process the magnitude of your message by staying silent for a while.
Allow whatever you’ve said to sink in as intended.
Develop an articulate and extensive vocabulary
An articulate, clear and expressive communicator is someone who knows
how to talk about feelings effortlessly , ideas, concepts, experiences and so
on. To be able to create a vivid picture in people’ s minds, one has to be able
to express themselves using the most appropriate and interesting  words and
phrases. You have to use the exact expressions to make yourself more
attention-worthy and relevant.
Keep working on building an extensive vocabulary to boost your self-
assuredness, poise, and charisma  during social and other scenarios. Commit
to learni ng three -four new words or phrases each day. People with extensive
vocabulary rarely face any trouble when it comes to expressing their views
and demonstrate higher confide nce levels while speaking to people.  There
is something irresistible about people who are always using the right words
at the right time. Think abou t it like this – the difference between a
functional and extensive voca bulary can be the difference between a
dazzlingly colorful and black and white image. Painting pictures with words
is an art that makes the conversation even more stimulating and gripping.
Emphasize on the correct word to communicate the intended
message
The word you emphasize on makes all the difference when it comes to
conveying a message clearly . Let us consider a sentence like, “Did he steal
my book?  ” Now , let’s look at how emphasizing each word can keep
changing the message. If the speaker emphasizes “he ”, it means the
speaker is asking if “he ” stole the book or someone else did it. Similarly ,
he/she emphasizes “steal  ”, the speaker is implying that he/she is unsure
whether someone stole their book or simply borrowed it. The again
emphasizing on “my ” conve ys the speaker isn’t certain whether someone
stole their book or someone else’s. Finally , emphasizing on “book  ” conveys
the speaker is implying he/she doesn’ t know if his/her book was stolen or
something else was stolen. Get the idea? The word you emphasize on while
speaking conveys the meaning you intend to convey . Emphasizing on the
wrong word can completely change the meaning of the sentence.
Keep away fr om r edundancy
Avoid loading your conversati on with too many fillers. Keep sentences
crisp, pithy and to the point. Avoid using highfalutin terms to showcase
your vocabulary . Instead, use the most relevant, effective and widely
understood term. Use appropriate words and phrases to communicate your
ideas in the most effective manner . Less is more when it comes to
vocabulary . A gifted speaker or communicator is someone who manages to
convey maximum ideas using minimum words or phrases.
Think of more effective and articulate ways to communicate your ideas and
feelings. Try replacing everyday  words and phrases with punch ier or more
compelling terms. For instance, instead of using “very hungry ”, you can
say “famished  ”. Similarly , “very angry  ” can be replaced with “livid ”. Get
the drift? Again, to become a more effective speaker , try to eliminate
redundant terms from your everyday conversations. For instance , “they said
(whatever they said) about my new dress ” can be repla ced with “they
commented on my new dress ”. The objective is to make your speech more
expressive, crisper and compelli ng. Focus on making your sentences tighter
by repla cing ineffective words and phrases with more relevant expressions.
Everyday words  such as “big ” or “large ” can be replace d with “colossal  ”
or “gigantic  ” Likewise, sacred can get a makeover with “petrified  ” or
“spooked  ”. Get into a pattern of consciou sly thinking up better ways to say
something. This habit will increase your impact as a communic ator. It will
make you come across as an interesting, arresting and colorful
conversationalist. Build a richer vocabulary to lend greater character ,
feelings and sensory experiences to the conversation.
How do you go about it? Use a small pocket diary or notebook  for writing
down new words and phrases you tend to come across every day. Try to
include these words and phrases on everyday usage. Master three to four
random words from the dictio nary each day and try to use it in your
conversation. There are tons of ‘word a day’ apps on your smartphones to
keep your voca bulary more enriching. It is a work in progress. You will
never complete ly master the vocabulary game, but you’ll keep getting
better . If you are one of those people who believe that a limited vocabulary
prevents you from holding a conversation, think again. Breathe  easy. There
are many multip le ways to build a powerful vocabulary if you have the will
to do it.
Utilize inflection in speech effectively
There are several ways to pack  more punch into your conversation. One
such valuable tip is to use inflec tion for optimal communication  efficiency .
Inflection or intonation pumps more value into your communication. Avoid
communicating in a sing-song tone if you want the listen/listeners to take
you seriously .
Vary your tone periodically to avoid coming across like a robot. Effective
communicators seldom use a monotone while speaking. They keep playing
with or varying their tone to suit their message. Intonation instills greater
feeling and emotion in your speech. It facilitates the process of
communication by conveying exactly what the speaker wants. Through a
person’ s intonation, you will know whether the person is being requested,
urging, commanding, questioning, suggesting, patronizing and so on. This
eliminates the process of miscommunication.
Many times, faulty inflection leads to miscommunication. For instance, let’s
assume, you wish to request someone to do you a favor . Rather than slightly
elevating the tone towards the end of the sentence, if you maintain a flat
tone, the request will sound more like an order or command. A slight rise in
the inflection towards the end of the sentence will make it appear like a
request. The listener may get the idea that they don’t have the option of
refusing you if you are making a statement instead of politely requesting
them. This is a classic case of miscommunication. Therefore , using the
appropriate inflection and intonation is critical to the process of
communication.
Make a conscious effort to get more variety , character , and clarity into your
tone if you want to come across as a persuasive and engaging
communicator . Intonation brings a wider range of emotions,  ideas, and
character into your communication. Sometimes, even some amount of
inflection can alter the meaning  of the entire message. A simple suggestion
runs the risk of coming across as condescending. Other times, our tone can
make all the difference in changing the meaning of a message. Our a tone,
as well as inflection, are the most common causes when it comes to creating
misunderstandings in the process of communication. 
Be mind ful of the tone and pitch  you use while talking to people. There are
three main pitches that can be used in normal conversation or speech. The
three fundamental pitches are high, mid and low speech. As a compelling
communicator , utilize varied pitches. Play with your voice to communicate
your true feelings and intentions as required.
The best way to know how your sound is either record your voice while
speaking and hearing it later or standing before a mirror while talking.
Narrate a detailed account or story while focusing on how you look and
sound. This helps enhance your speech delivery . Identify areas that can be
worked upon to make your speech or conversation more power-packed.
Without rehears ing, try to talk about any random topic for a couple of
minutes. You will know the exact through of your voice, while also gauging
the desired effect of your sound. Once you know your weak communication
spots, it is easier to work upon it.
Keep in mind that your voice is your biggest weapon as a communicator .
Use it generously to your advantage to convey your ideas in the most
effective manner . Avoid speakin g in a monotone, especially when you are
delivering an important speech or engaging in an interesting conversation.
Our voice can be one of the most flexible communication tools , which can
be used by adding plenty of effects, feelings, and coloration.  It will add
more punch to your communication.
If you want to make an important point, begin on a flat note. Then, elevate
your pitch slight ly towards the middle, and end it on a flat note again. Avoid
ending what you are saying on the high pitch because this makes your
statement come close to a question. Ensure you end on a flat note, so it
seems like you are making a strong statement rather than raising a question.
As some one who wants to master communication, you can also enlist the
services of a voice and speec h coach to make your presentation and
conversation skills even stronger . Use a lot of variations to add more variety
to the speech.
Keep your  pronunciations and enunciations clear
Start working on your sound articulations to come across as an effective and
compelling communicator . Have an impressive command over phonetics
for soun ding good and reducing the chances for misunderstandings. Your
sounds and appropriation should come across as intended.
Avoid mumbling, muttering and speaking under your breath if you want to
be an effective speaker . It takes away from delivering the message in a
powerful manner . Few things are as unflattering as people whose speech is
barely audible. You will have to keep saying the same things over and over
again, leading to confusion. Open your mouth loud, wide and clear while
speaking to drive home the message effectively . This will lend more clarity
to what you are saying. Aspirate your sounds correctly to sound good.
Aspiration of sounds is vital where speech clarity is concerned. Understand
when you are required to stretch  or condense a sound. One letter or a group
of similar letters can be utilized for creating multiple sounds that one should
be aware of while talking or giving a speech.
For instance, take “beat ” and “bit ”. Whil e the former has a longer “I ”
sound, the later is shorter . Then  again “pull ” and “pool ” are aspirated and
pronounced differently even when both communicate similar sounds. When
unsure, go through word pronun ciations online or use an app to check the
correct sounds.
Even the same letters are aspirated distinctly using varied words and
phrases. For example, “the ” used in “thick  ” has is even more aspirated
than “the ” sound in a word like “they ” or “the ”. Likewise, “day ” and
“they ” are articulated distinctly even though they sound close. For those
experiencing difficulty with enunciating or articulating sounds, try mouth
exercises for increasing your jaw flexibility . Use tongue twisters to master
varied sounds enunciations and articulations.
Chapter 5:
Breaking Free from the Loop of Negative
Communication Patterns
Being an effective communicator and social being is also about avoiding
negative communication patterns. We now know only too well how vital
and indispensable effective communication and social skills are within our
daily personal, business and social life.
Great communi cation skills aren’ t just needed by political leaders and
orators, but anyone who desires to enjoy rewarding and fulfilling
relationships. You need it for everything from negotiating a lucrative
business deal to persuading your partner to dine at your favorite restaurant.
Yet we falter with social and communication skills that should come
naturally to us. Miscommunication leads to misunderstandings,  arguments,
and breakdown in relationships.
Let us consider a situation wher e, as a project leader , you are attempting to
explain to a team member where they’ve gone wrong with the project. You
have said all that you had to, simply to realize that the person is not
listening. He/sh e has mentally switched off as is evident through their
mannerisms and body language.  Think about your boos overact ing to a tiny
issue, which you obviously can’ t tell him/her for fear of the consequences.
There are tons of such awkward  communication scenarios where we make
mistakes that break our connect ion with people or fail to convey a message
as desired. The worst part about these communication errors is that we can’t
even identify where we’ve erred. We fail to realize why a person didn’ t
react in the intended manner or the reason we couldn’ t get someone to do
what we wanted them to or why they have stopped listening to us. Then,
these tiny misunderstandings grow into bigger issues until you find it
impossible to communicate with the other person.
Here are some of the most common communication mistakes or negative
communication patterns and strategies to overcome them to make you an
effective communicator and help you enjoy more rewarding relationships.
The mind r eaders
This is another negative communication pattern or stumbling block when it
comes to effective communication. Before you finish speaking your
sentence, the person will jump in and complete it for you. They claim to
know and understand exactly what you want to say even before you say it.
This makes them ineffective communicators because rather than actively
listening to what the speaker is trying to convey , they act on the assumption
that they already know everything. This makes them switch off. This
tendency to think “I know what he/she is going to say”  or ”how he/she
feels”  prevents us from actively listening to people, which means we can
end up losing plenty of important information.
Listen keenly to each word people speak, tune in to their voice and observe
their body language to comprehend their message in the right context.
Avoid reading clues in isolation. For instance, if a person is fidgety , it can
be a sign of nervousness, excitement or a hyperactive persona. Look at
everything from their body language to choose your words to their voice.
Avoid singling out isolated information pieces from their verbal or non-
verbal communication and make sweeping conclusions based on it to
assume you have understood them. This is one of the biggest
communication blunders. Understand the message as a whole  by being a
mindful listener without sweeping judgments, assumptions and conclusions.
We are all guilty of selective listening, which can be a huge hindrance to the
process of communication. Inste ad of listening to what the speaker intends
to communicate , we hear only what we want to and lend it our own
interpretation. For instance, when someone says, “I want you to ace this ”,
the person may mean that they want you to excel at something . However ,
you may interpr et it as, “you suck at this currently  ”. This is nowh ere close
to what the speaker implied. The intention behind what they said was
completely different from the way you interpreted it. The speaker implied
that they wanted you to boost your competency levels to accomplish stellar
results, which is not the same as you are lousy at it right now. It only means
there is plenty of room for improvements. However , with your filters, you
only hear what you want, which proves a hindrance to the process of
effective listeni ng. Avoid filtering what people say or pick up a few
words/phrases here and there. Rather , pay keen attention to what the
speaker is saying and try to gather their message as a whole, complete with
all verbal and non-verbal clues to be a more ef fective communicator .
Let us consider an example of selective listening for understan ding how it
can negatively affect the communication process. Susan had a particularly
stressful day at a restaurant where she worked as a waitress. She gets home
after a busy night and finds her husband Samuel glued to his favorite
television series. He casually inquires how her day was, and the much
stressed Susan mentions everyth ing that went wrong that evenin g. To begin
with, the place was packed with customers, so she had to deal with a lot of
crowds. Later , she did not manage to get a lot of tips that evening. Susan
finishes off her rant by saying that though she served a group of customers,
who ran up a huge bill of $500  particularly well by going out of the way,
they didn’t tip her. She was frustrated and upset that people could be so
inconsiderate.
Samuel didn’ t speak much and instead broke into laughter . Susa n asked him
where he found humor in the entire situation when she was clearly upset.
Samuel mention s the laughter wasn’ t in response to what she said, but at the
hilarious situation on the show , he was watching.
Susan started losing it by now. Samuel didn’ t say anything to comfort or
reassure Susan, which made her question Samuel if he had even heard what
she said. “Of cours e I heard everything you said, you should be glad you
made a tip of $500 from your last table for the evening  ”. Susan, livid by
now, picked up her things and marched out angrily , slamming the door.
Samuel was bewildered about her reaction. What wrong did he say to elicit
such a negative response from her? Do you notice the problem in their
communication? Samuel practiced selective listening. He was not actively
listening to Susan when she was pouring her heart about how bad her day
was. He only caught bits and pieces of what she was saying while focusing
his attention on other things, much to her angst and disappointment.
Even when you commit to completely hearing the person out, your life can
be full of instances where you unknowingly practice selective listening. We
hear only what we want to while eliminating important inform ation from
the communication, which hampers the entire process. It may come across
as highly inconsiderate, insens itive, stupid, rude or disrespectful to the
speaker . Make an effort to listen to and interpret the speaker ’s message in
its entirety .
Obsessed with hijacking and winning conversations
The most negative people to deal with during any communication process
are probably the ones who are obsessed with winning every discussion,
argument, and debate. They believe it is their birthright to hijack or win
every discussion. Read it as many times as you like but you are never ever
going to win any argument or get people to agree with you by starting your
discussion with, “I am going to prove you wrong now ” or “I am going to
prove this point  to you now ”. You will simply end up raising the person’ s
defenses by stating straight off the bat how you are hell-bent on proving
them wrong.
While communicating with people (especially when it comes to debates,
differences, and arguments), do not fan the other person’ s defenses. The
listener is likelier to prepare for a mental battle ahead if you inform them
that you are on a mission to prove them wrong. Plenty of people make the
mistake of saying, “That is not true. Let me prove how incorr ect you are ”.
What is the whole idea about informing someone that you are going to
prove them wron g? Go about proving your point in a more logical, balanced
and thoughtful manner . Keep in mind that changing someone’ s mind,
perceptions or views is never going to be easy. When you establish fairly
early that you want to prove something to someone, they will rarely listen
to you or admit that they are wrong or that you’ve manage d to prove
yourself right.
Avoid letting others know that you are going to prove them wrong. Do it
cleverly using facts and reasoni ng. Even if you know the listener is clearly
wrong, play along and say some thing to the effect of, “Well I was thinking
slightly differ ently regarding this, and I could very well be wrong. I am
frequently wrong, much like everyone else. Let us look at the facts now,
should we? ” Notice what  we did there?  We adopted a more neutral,
balanced, logical and scientific approach, which is tough to contest. It drops
the other listener ’s defenses.
No logical person on earth will disagree or object to something  like. “I can
be incorr ect. Let us consider the facts  ”. Wha t woul d be a scientists’
approach? Do they go about trying to prove everyone wrong? Or are they
only concerned  with uncovering facts? Your communicatio n approach
during argumen ts and differences should be the same – sticking to facts.
Using a balanced and scientific approach while dealing with potentially
uncomfortable subjects or arguments can make you an effective
communicator!
We rarely get into trouble for admitting we can be wrong too. It prevents
the issue from escalating and automatically causes the other person to
assume a balanced approach too at a subconscious level. They will also
adopt a balanced, logical and fair stance when they find you demonstrating
greater objectivity . The listener will realize that they could be wrong, too,
just like you. When you attack, the other listener follows the same pattern at
a subconscious level. When you bring down your defenses by mentioning
you could be wrong, the other person is likely to follow suit. Don’ t tell
someone they are wrong right at the beginning if you really want to prove
them wrong.
When people do not face strong emotions or resistance, they are likelier to
alter their stance. On the other hand, when people are told they are wrong,
they don’t just resent it but strive harder to prove themselves right. This
leads to a neve r-ending loop of arguments, ego battles, conflicts, one-
upmanship and much more. When people get the feeling that their
knowledge, view s, beliefs, sense of self-worth and values are under threat,
their stand toughens. An effective communicator knows how to make
people drop their guard and be more open and flexible by mentioning
upfront that they (the speaker) could be wrong.
Avoid playing Mr ./Ms. Fix-It all the time
When someone is speaking to you or pouring your heart out to you, unless
they actively solicit advice or suggestions, resist the urge to offer solutions
or fix things for them. Many times when people share their struggles,
challenges, feelings or emotions, they aren’ t looking for solutions. They
may probably know that somet hing cannot be resolved, which is exactly
why they are so rattled by it. All they need is someone to lend them an
empathetic ear .
Overcome the desire to offer unwanted suggestions, however compelling
the urge if you want people to take you seriously or talk to you. Listen to
the speaker attentively without chiming in with your two cents. Sometimes,
only acknowledg ment and empathy can completely change the way they are
feeling.
Let us look at the conversation. Person A, “The baby is has given me
sleepless nights.  I have barely slept in the last week. It is tiring, stressful
and exhausting  ”.
Person B, “You should consider supplementing breastfeeding with bottle
feed, so the little one doesn’ t get too hungry every now and then, especially
at night. When it sleeps on a full stomach, it won’ t keep waking  you hungry
”.
Person A didn’ t necessarily ask Person B for a solution, but Person B out of
well-meaning concern nevertheless suggested what can be done to
overcome a challenging situation faced by Person A. Many times our
suggestions and are well-intend ed and offered out of consideration for the
other person. However , it can still backfire if all the person wants is to be
heard. Compare this with something like, “I really understand how stressful
and tiring handling a newborn can be. It can sap one’ s ener gy completely .
However , you are indeed doing a wonderful job, and this is merely a phase
that passes once the little ones grow up. Then, you’ll miss these  days. Once
the kids grow up and live their independent life, you’ll remembe r these days
fondly”.  See what we did here? We acknowledged Person A’s feelings,
comforted them, encouraged them, appreciated their efforts, and urged that
they make the most of these moments. Won’t this make the other person
feel better instead of of fering practical, clinical advice?
Neutralizing messages
Notice how several leaders and communicators render themselves
ineffective when they neutraliz e their message by following a powerful
thought or message with fluff. The message is stripped of its impact. The
person begins by saying something compelling. This is followed by
pondering about  its impact, whic h then leads the speaker to finish with fluff.
For instance, you may say something like, “Honestly , I didn’ t mean to say
you are ineffecti ve but…  ” or “I didn’t really mean to be rude or anything  ”.
It robs the message from its efficiency . You may not be able to
communicate what you are trying to with the desired impact.
Neutralizing messages can also occur in the form of non-ver bal gestures
like smiling, diminishing your posture, shrugging and more. It may not be
conspicuous; however , it decreases the effect of your message at a deeper ,
subconscious level. Effective communicators avoid resorting to neutralizing
messages. They will communicate their message in a non-of fensive manner
without killing the impact of their message. They will communicate their
message without sugar coating it and listen to the other person’ s response.
Likewise, stay away from using one size for all approach while
communicating with different personalities. Every person has their own
distinct persona lity, fears, desires, views, communication needs, and
expectations. Ascertain that your communication adapts to or adjusts to
these difference s whenever possible. For instance, you may be teaching a
group of people with different personalities and learning styles of their own.
Consider these differences in personalities and learning styles to make the
learning as effective as possible. Some folks may benefit from a more
theoretical learning approach, while other people may prefer a practical and
hands-on mode of learning. An impactful communicator is someone who
can consider different learning and communication styles to make sure they
are understood.
The seasoned defendants
The defense person is someone who stops listening and starts attacking in
the midd le of the conversation by defending themselves or their actions.
Each time someone says something that sounds critical, we raise our
defenses. We think people are attempting to pull us down even they are
offering constructive and well-meaning criticism. Likewise, if you are
communicating with a person who stops listening and begins defending
themselves, make your criticism sound non-accusatory . This will get the
person to listen more keenly and consider your point of view .
Drop the listener ’s defenses by utilizing the sandwich technique by adding a
potentially critical or negative statement between two positive statements.
Let us consider an example of the sandwich method. “I think you are an
awesome dancer; your form, style, and movement are impressively varied.
However , I would be really glad if you can work on facial expressions to
achieve the same degree of perfection. You will be one of the most skilled
dancers in the gr oup if you do it  ”.
Did you observe  what we did here? We juxtaposed a potentially  negative or
offensive statement (that the dancer is not very good with facial
expressions) between two feel-good statements to make it more palatable
for the listener . The listener is likelier to lower their defenses and accept
your suggestion s. The method can be successfully used across personal,
professional and social relationships.
Every time you intend to discu ss a potentially uncomfortable or negative
topic with someone, avoid saying it straight off the bat. The person is
likelier to react negatively or defensively since they are caught off guard.
Instead, offer indicators and signposts. We’ve had all seen street signposts
that give us clues about directions to our destination. Give people a heads-
up abou t what to expect. Mentally prepare them for what is coming next
instead of just dropping the bomb. Begin by saying something  such as, “I
genuinely want to resolve this issue else I wouldn’ t be speaking to you about
it ” or “I could do with some reassura nce or comfort from you which  is
exactly why I am discussing this with you ”. You are giving the person the
required importance by mentioning that if the problem or issue wasn’ t
important for you, you wouldn’ t have brought it up with the person.
You are talking about the issue simply because it is important for you. You
are making your point in a non-of fensive or non-accusatory manner . The
listener is likelier to think that the objective of your communication isn’t to
accuse or blame them but seek reassurance from them, which will make
them less defensive and more open to the idea of listening to you.
If you don’t want people to get defensive or launch into an argument, don’t
make your statement as if it is the ultimate truth. Start by mentioning you
can be wrong, and that both you and the listener should consider  or evaluate
facts to determine if you are right. Mention up front that there is a
possibility you could be wrong. This helps the other person drop their guard
instantly . They will be more open, approachable and receptive to your view .
Rather than giving the other person the feeling that they are responsible for
everything for what you are feeling, take responsibility for your feelings by
utilizing more “I ” and less “you ” sente nces. This makes you appear
responsible for feeling somethin g, much like it is your point of view and no
fact. It will sound less accusatory or offensive to the listener . They won’ t
get a feeling that you are critici zing or accusing them of somet hing, which
brings down their defensiveness.
Rather than telling the listener , “you rarely have time for me ” or “we don’t
spend enough time together  ”, you can make it more digestible and
acceptable for the listener by saying something such as, “I’d really like if we
could spend more time together because I cherish our moments  together  ”.
In the latter statements, you are communicating your point without blaming
the other person. It conveys your needs without accusing the other person of
being inconsiderate towards your feelings. In a way, you are accepting
responsibility for thinking or feeling in a particular way .
People stop listening to us when they feel like you are attackin g them. Let
us say a projec t leader has to convey to his/her team that they are not
efficient where a particular project is concerned. Rather than saying, “You
are not working  efficiently or being productive on this project  ” or “This
team is ineffective, and now you do things the way I ask you to ” say, “I
possess vast experience in managing projects of this natur e and the way
forwar d to be mor e effective is this …  ”
This method is effective because people are less prone to get defensive
when you talk about yourself. The moment you make the issue about them,
they will respond negatively or become disillusioned. The listener/listeners
will be more open, responsive and accepting to the idea of reflecting upon
what you are trying to communicate, even when it isn’ t positive.
Similarly , you reduce the chances of arguing with the other person about
who is right. Since you mention things related to yourself, they aren’ t
debatable, which  minimizes the scope for conflict. On the contrary , if you
say things about the listener , they are likelier to get defensive or
argumentative by challenging your view . When we talk about ourselves, we
shut doors for the other person to dispute it.
Refrain fr om being a yes-man
Being an effective communica tor is not about agreeing to everything
everyone says. Rather , it is about how you disagree with them without
offending them. This is especially true for people who are not confident or
possess a high sense of self-esteem. You may be socially awkward or easily
intimated by others. Even when you don’t wish you, you will go with
whatever others  say without expressing your needs or preferences. If you
identify with this, it is time you learn to talk for yourself or take a courteous
yet firm or assertive stand about your needs and preferences.
Assertiveness and aggressiveness are not the same though you may think
there is a thin line between them. Assertiveness is a person’ s ability to stand
up for themselv es while staying polite, respectful, courteou s and non-
offensive. It is about arriving at a win-win, where neither other people nor
your needs are overlooked. Aggression is more about ‘I win, you lose,’
while assertiveness is about, ‘everyone wins.’  You are not oblig ated to be a
people pleaser , and that should reflect in your communication patterns.
Speak to people in a logical and balanced manner without attacking them if
you think your needs are not being met or you want to state your
preferences. For example, if you say something such as, “I prefer going
street market hopping than visiting high-end boutiques for shopping  ”. You
are stating your needs and preferences rather than giving orders about,
which sounds more acceptable and balanced to the listener . It is about
expressing your views, needs, ideas, and preferences in a genuine and
healthy manner to arrive at some win-win situation.
When you are stating your preferences, you are still leaving scope for the
other person to express their opinion and preferences. When you establish
both your and another person’ s needs, the opportunity of arriving at a win-
win situation is higher . Say a courteous yet firm “no ” when you are not up
for doing something. Politely turn down any requests by sayin g no when
you don’ t want to do something.
Assertiveness is integral to the process of being an ace communicator . It
involves standing up for your values and beliefs while being unafraid of
articulating your desires, needs, and goals to others. Assertiveness in
communication involves putting everyone on an equal footing and focusing
on mutual respect. There is no intention on your part to hurt or offend
others, just like you will not accept other people hurting, offending or
undermining you. The focus is on mutual respect and arriving at a win-win
situation for everyone involved.
Here are some valuable tips for boosting your assertiveness quotient. See
others as force you to need to collaborate or work with inste ad of work
against. When you are facing any challenging situation in any aspect of
your life with certain people, focus on collaboration or solution rather than
competition and one-upmanship. Even if you end up winning the argument,
you may lose the relationship. Effective communication is utilizing every
challenging situation to strengt hen your connection with a person. This
helps us leave a positive impression on people once the challenging
situation is behind us.
Think about this carefully . Each time we launch into an argument or a fight
with our partner/spouse, we view it as a “me versus him or her ” war. Look
at the challenge from a point that you are both in one team, and the enemy
is the challenge you are facing as a couple. Effective communication is
about working towards a common solution instead of trying to figure out
who is right. This one technique alone will help you enjoy more effective
communication in your interpersonal relationships. Stay assertive, while
focusing on the bigger picture or greater good. Instead of perceiving
everyone who does not agree with you as an enemy , see them as an ally you
can work with to arrive at a win-win solution.
Consciously develop the habit of stating your needs, feelings, opinions, and
preferences openly . You don’t always have to go with whatever  people say.
If you have a slightly varied preference or perspective, clarify it. One of the
biggest blunders  we make when it comes to communication in intimate and
interpersonal relationships is that we always assume that the other person
should automati cally know our needs or understand our feelings without us
having to articulate it. Stay honest, transparent, respectful and courteous
when it comes to expressing your needs. While ordering a sandwich at the
café, would you rather for a ham cheese sandwich or ham on rye with
tomatoes, extra  cheddar , cucumber and less of lettuce? Obviously , the
second one! Then, why are we afraid to express our needs, opinions, and
preferences in our personal, professional and social relationships?
Do not feel guilty about standing up for your own needs or preferences.
When something isn’t compatible with your beliefs, values, preferences,
and priorities, refuse without regretting it. Kill the guilt. Repla ce this guilt
with constructive or positive self-talk. If you refuse a friend who is
constantly borrowing money from you without taking responsibility for
their life, there isn’t a need to think, “I am a terrible person because I am
not helping my friend  ”. Rather think along the lines of, “I deserv e to take
care of my interests and monetary stability without comprising on my
overall financial security  ”.
Another clever tip for eliminatin g the guilt while being assertive  and saying
no to people is to imagine yourself standing up for someone you care about
deeply . Would you let anyone do something similar with your loved one?
No? We are likelier to take a stand when it is about a loved one. It gets
much easier to talk for someone we care about deeply instead of ourselves.
Always use beginning with “I ” rather than “you ”, where you take onus for
your feelings instead of accusing another person.
Failur e to recognize and adapt to someone’ s comm unication
style
Identifying a person’ s commun ication style is integral to the process of
effective communication, while also reducing instances of conflicts and
misunderstanding. Here are fundamental communication styles that you can
adapt to or manage for accomplishing more fulfilling, balanced and
harmonious relationships.
Assertive communicators – Assertive communicators are folks who are high
on self-confidence and self-esteem. Assertiveness is known to be the most
balanced and healthiest commun ication style, which seeks to find a middle
path between being too aggres sive or passive, while also keeping away
from manipulation tactics.
Assertive people  know their limits, and do not take too well to being pushed
around by people who wish to get them to do certain things that they don’t
want to. At the same time, they will rarely violate other ’s feelings to meet
their objectives. This is a win-win communication style since assertive
communicators almost always think of solutions that are advantageous to
everyone involved instead of only thinking about themselves.
Typical charact eristics of an assertive communicator are the ability to
achieve their goals without hurting other people. They strive to preserve
their own rights while also being mindful and respectful of other ’s rights.
They have high social and emotional expressiveness.  Assertive
communicators like to make their own choices, while also accepting
responsibility for these choices.
Typical non-verb al behavior of assertive communicators is a medium voice
pitch, volume and speech rate. Notice that their posture will almost always
be open  and relaxed. They will stand tall and barely demonstrate signs of
nervousness. Their gestures are more expansive, open and receptive.
Assertive people like to maintain eye contact and a more spatial position,
which communi cates that they are control of their actions and respectful
towards other people. Typical things said by them include something,
“Please will you lower the speed ? I am trying to drink some water  ” or “I
apologize I can’t assist you with your homework since I have an
appointment with my dentist scheduled for this evening  ”. Try to adopt  an
assertive style of communication if you want to be ef fective.
Aggressive communicators – You wish you didn’ t have to deal with these
types of communicators, but unfortunately , they exist everywhere. This
communication style is all about winning, mostly at the cost of other
people. When someone is overly aggressive in their communication, you
can use assertiveness to stand up for yourself.
Aggressive communicators will always hold their needs, preferences,
beliefs, opinions , views, and desires over others. They act like they possess
greater rights than other people and are entitled to decide for everyone
around them. Aggressive communicators are often so fixated on their
delivery of what they are trying to say that the message is eventually lost. 
The typical non-verbal behav ior pattern of aggressive communicators
includes speakin g in an unusual ly high volume, keeping a wider and more
expansive posture than others around them to signify power and occupy
more physical space. Their facia l expressions are often rapid and jerk. The
language they use is along the lines of “Don’ t you understand such a simple
or basic thing?  ” or “This has to be done exactly as I say or my way ” or
“you drive me mad ”. Aggressive communicators are adept in the art of
blaming, calling  people names, criticizing, insulting, taunting,  threatening
and being sarcastic to feel good about themselves.
Passive aggressive communicators look passive on the surfac e for it but
play out their frustration or rage behind the scenes. They are almost always
grappling with feelings of powerlessness and resentment. Passive
aggressive communicators will generally say things like, “why don’t you
take over the project. My inputs are anyway not valued  ” or “you know more
than others anyway , you should be the one heading the project  ”. There is a
dash of sarcasm in everything they say, which stems from a feeling of
resentment and frustration.
What is the body language of a passive-aggressive person? They will talk in
a sugary  sweet tone while marinating an asymmetrical posture and quick
facial expressio ns as well as gestures that on the surface look innocent.
Their spatial position comprise s standing close enough to make the other
person feel uncomfortable. Sometimes, they will lightly touch others, while
pretending to be warm, welcoming and friendly .
Submissive communicators – Submissive communicators are people
pleasers. They will do just about anything to avoid a confr ontation or
displeasing people at any expense. They tend to bend backward in their bid
to place  other people’ s needs, wants, desires, opinions, beliefs, and
preferences before theirs. Submissive communicators often operate under
the belief that their needs are not as important as those of others around
them. This leads to plenty of frustration and disappointment. The language
used by a submi ssive communic ator includes something along the lines of,
“Oh! It's fine. I don’t really want it now ” or “you can choose whatever you
want, anything is fine with me  ”.
The body language of submissive communicators includes speaking using a
soft tone, employing a diminutiv e head-down position, fidgeting or nervous
gestures and a posture that makes them look much lower in stature than
other people. Their body language is marked by a victim mentality .
Manipulative communicator – These are probably the shrewdest, most
scheming and dangerous of all communicators. They are calculating and
often prey on other ’s emotions for serving their own purpose. Manipulative
communicators have the ability to influence, coerce and control others for
their own benefit. The words and phrases they say always have some
underlying meaning or hidden motive, which their unfortunate victims are
not aware of.
The typical things they say include, “You are indeed fortunate enoug h to
enjoy their lovely pastries. I wish I was as fortunate as you to have them
too. I can’t really affor d these expensive pastries  ” or “I didn’ t get the time
to buy anything, so I didn’ t have any option but to put on this dress. I am
just hoping that I don’t look too bad in it. I wish I had something else to
wear  ”. Their voice is generally patronizing, often going in the direction of
high-pitched, while the facial expressions are more ‘hang dog’  types.
Closed minds
How many times have we faced the frustrating prospect of interacting with
people who filter everything we say through the lens of their own biases,
preconceived notions, myopic beliefs, and prejudices? Doesn’ t it act as a
hindrance to the process of effective communication? Everyone operates
with its own set of values, viewpoints, and beliefs. However , staying
inflexible and rigid about your views does stops us from hearing or learning
something new about the speak er or being open to what they are trying to
communicate. Avoid operating with pre-held views and beliefs that prevent
you from gaining new insights about an individual or situation.
Not everyone you talk to is going to hold similar views and beliefs as you.
Empathy , understanding, and considerateness are the biggest factors of
positive commu nication. When we see things from the other person’ s point
of view , we understand where they come from even if we do not necessarily
agree with them. The objective of mastering interpersonal skills and active
listening is to keep our minds open, flexible and accepting.  Try to put
yourself in the other person’ s shoes to develop more understand ing of their
situation or views. People who disagree with you need not be wrong. Not
all people share your situation or circumstances. Try to think from the other
person’ s perspective to understand their situation or views more ef fectively .
Today’ s world is a melting pot of cultures, ethnicities, abilities, religions,
sexual orientations, political views and much more’  Classifying and
labeling people using sweepin g generalizations can kill the process of
effective communication. It is easier and takes much less effort to place
people in dif ferent mental boxes that we’ve prepared.
However , in the long run, it doesn’ t help build meaningful relationships.
One of the biggest signs of an effective communicator is the ability to
understand, consider and appre ciate varied views even when they do not
necessarily match with our own. Make a sincere effort to know people
rather than judging them. Avoid assuming things unless you have clear
evidence. Assumptions are the biggest stumbling blocks of communication
and listening. We render the process of communication ineffective by
resorting to generalizations and assumptions. It hampers the opportunity of
knowing and understanding people.
Make a sincere effort to unders tand the other person’ s unique background,
overall life experiences and personality traits while listening.  Develop a
practice of meeting and interacti ng with new people from different places or
cultures. Give others the space and comfort for freely expressing their
views. Take time to consider other people’ s views. Take into consideration
the other ’s expectations, views, and needs while communicating. Stay
assertive without getting disrespectful.
When you don’t agree with someone as we discussed earlier saying
something such as “Now, this is a really differ ent or unique way of looking
at things, which I hadn’ t consider ed earlier . I am intrigued. Can you please
tell me why you think like this?  ” You don't necessarily agree with the other
person, but you are still open the door for sharing or exchangin g views and
increasing your own understanding about why people think the way they
do. Communication and social intelligence are about adapting to different
personalities, cultures, views, societies and more to form healthy and
meaningful personal, professional and social relationships. Every time you
are tempted to ar gue or disagree with other people.
The stuck r ecords
Some folks are inclined to go on and on like a stuck record that the other
person switches off mentally or stops responding (remember the traffic
signal technique in an earlier chapter). There is only so much we can focus
on for a given time span witho ut being bored or distracted. Long-winded,
verbose and wordy sentences that never seem to end can tire the listener ,
focusing him/her on switching off. Avoid rambling. Use a full mental stop
once you are done conveying your message. Give the other  person an
opportunity to process the infor mation and clarify their understanding. To
gauge the listener ’s initial unde rstanding, make a statement, followed by a
question. One of the biggest communication blunders peop le make is
speaking withou t offering the listener an opportunity to give their take,
process the information or clarify their understanding of what they (the
speaker) said.
Observe how people become ineffective communicators by communicating
the same point using different words. They will restructure what they are
trying to communicate until it becomes redundant. If you believe the other
person has not comprehended what you are communicating, use meta-
communication. This implies you are offering your comments on a
conversation to get a person to open up.
For instance, if you get the idea that the other person isn’t reacting to a vital
message say something to the effect of, “Hey, I observe that you are not
responding/r eacting to what I just said. However , I feel it is vital and
relevant to our overall team performance. How come?  ” This offers us an
opportunity to understand why the listener has switched off. You will know
if the person was able to understand what you said.
Rather than trying to say one thing using different words because you get
the idea that the other person has not comprehended what you are trying to
communicate, utilize meta-communication to do a quick check -in of their
understanding.
C o n c l u s i o n
Thank you for choosing this book.
I genuin ely hope it has offered you several techniques, pointers, and
strategies for communicating effectively across many settings to enjoy more
lasting, meaningful, gratifying and fulfilling relationships.
The objective of the book is to help you get rid of your fears, nervousness
and lack of confidence to take on the world in a more self-assured and
effective manner , one communication skill at a time. Communication is the
master key to building solid, rewarding and lasting relationships  along with
impacting your chances of success in life.
The book also helps you understand the finer details required for
communicating ef fectively with people, including building listening skills.
The next step is to start using strategies mentioned in the book right away .
Information has to be translated  into knowledge, which in turn is translated
into experience  and wisdom. Of course, you won’ t transform from an
awkward, shy or inhibited communicator into a communication pro
overnight. How ever, one step a time you’ll get closer to your goal if you
work on it in a disciplined and consistent. With impleme ntation and
practice, you can steadily but definitely transform into a communication
force to reckon with.
Finally , if you enjoyed reading the book, please take the time to share your
views by posting a review of Amazon. It’d be highly appreciated!
