NIMH
Substance Use and Co-Occurring Mental Disorders
What does it mean to have substance use and co-occurring mental disorders?
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a treatable mental disorder that affects a person’s brain and behavior, leading to their inability to control their use of substances like legal or illegal drugs, alcohol, or medications. Symptoms can be moderate to severe, with addiction being the most severe form of SUD.

People with a SUD may also have other mental health disorders, and people with mental health disorders may also struggle with substance use. These other mental health disorders can include anxiety disorders, depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), bipolar disorder, personality disorders, and schizophrenia, among others. For more information, please see the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Common Comorbidities with Substance Use Disorders Research Report .

Though people might have both a SUD and a mental disorder, that does not mean that one caused the other. Research suggests three possibilities that could explain why SUDs and other mental disorders may occur together:

Common risk factors can contribute to both SUDs and other mental disorders. Both SUDs and other mental disorders can run in families, meaning certain genes may be a risk factor. Environmental factors, such as stress or trauma, can cause genetic changes that are passed down through generations and may contribute to the development of a mental disorder or a substance use disorder.
Mental disorders can contribute to substance use and SUDs. Studies found that people with a mental disorder, such as anxiety, depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), may use drugs or alcohol as a form of self-medication. However, although some drugs may temporarily help with some symptoms of mental disorders, they may make the symptoms worse over time. Additionally, brain changes in people with mental disorders may enhance the rewarding effects of substances, making it more likely they will continue to use the substance.
Substance use and SUDs can contribute to the development of other mental disorders. Substance use may trigger changes in brain structure and function that make a person more likely to develop a mental disorder.
How are substance use disorder and co-occurring mental disorders diagnosed and treated?
When someone has a SUD and another mental health disorder, it is usually better to treat them at the same time rather than separately. People who need help for a SUD and other mental disorders should see a health care provider for each disorder. It can be challenging to make an accurate diagnosis because some symptoms are the same for both disorders, so the provider should use comprehensive assessment tools to reduce the chance of a missed diagnosis and provide the right treatment.

It also is essential that the provider tailor treatment, which may include behavioral therapies and medications, to an individual’s specific combination of disorders and symptoms. It should also take into account the person’s age, the misused substance, and the specific mental disorder(s). Talk to your health care provider to determine what treatment may be best for you and give the treatment time to work.

Behavioral therapies
Research has found several behavioral therapies that have promise for treating individuals with co-occurring substance use and mental disorders. Health care providers may recommend behavioral therapies alone or in combination with medications.

Some examples of effective behavioral therapies for adults with SUDs and different co-occurring mental disorders include:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of talk therapy aimed at helping people learn how to cope with difficult situations by challenging irrational thoughts and changing behaviors.
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) uses concepts of mindfulness and acceptance or being aware of and attentive to the current situation and emotional state. DBT also teaches skills that can help control intense emotions, reduce self-destructive behaviors (such as suicide attempts, thoughts, or urges; self-harm; and drug use), and improve relationships.
Assertive community treatment (ACT) is a form of community-based mental health care that emphasizes outreach to the community and an individualized treatment approach.
Therapeutic communities (TC)  are a common form of long-term residential treatment that focuses on helping people develop new and healthier values, attitudes, and behaviors.
Contingency management (CM) principles encourage healthy behaviors by offering vouchers or rewards for desired behaviors.
Behavioral therapies for children and adolescents

Some effective behavioral treatments for children and adolescents include:

Brief strategic family therapy (BSFT) therapy targets family interactions thought to maintain or worsen adolescent SUDs and other co-occurring problem behaviors.
Multidimensional family therapy (MDFT) works with the whole family to simultaneously address multiple and interacting adolescent problem behaviors, such as substance use, mental disorders, school problems, delinquency, and others.
Multisystemic therapy (MST) targets key factors associated with serious antisocial behavior in children and adolescents with SUDs.
Medications
There are effective medications that treat opioid , alcohol , and nicotine addiction  and lessen the symptoms of many other mental disorders. Some medications may be useful in treating multiple disorders. For more information on behavioral treatments and medications for SUDs, visit NIDA’s Drug Facts  and Treatment  webpages. For more information about treatment for mental disorders, visit NIMH's Health Topics webpages.

mayoclinic.org
Drug addiction (substance use disorder) - Symptoms and causes
Print
23–29 minutes
Overview

Drug addiction, also called substance use disorder, is a disease that affects a person's brain and behavior and leads to an inability to control the use of a legal or illegal drug or medicine. Substances such as alcohol, marijuana and nicotine also are considered drugs. When you're addicted, you may continue using the drug despite the harm it causes.

Drug addiction can start with experimental use of a recreational drug in social situations, and, for some people, the drug use becomes more frequent. For others, particularly with opioids, drug addiction begins when they take prescribed medicines or receive them from others who have prescriptions.

The risk of addiction and how fast you become addicted varies by drug. Some drugs, such as opioid painkillers, have a higher risk and cause addiction more quickly than others.

As time passes, you may need larger doses of the drug to get high. Soon you may need the drug just to feel good. As your drug use increases, you may find that it's increasingly difficult to go without the drug. Attempts to stop drug use may cause intense cravings and make you feel physically ill. These are called withdrawal symptoms.

Help from your health care provider, family, friends, support groups or an organized treatment program can help you overcome your drug addiction and stay drug-free.
Symptoms

Drug addiction symptoms or behaviors include, among others:

    Feeling that you have to use the drug regularly — daily or even several times a day
    Having intense urges for the drug that block out any other thoughts
    Over time, needing more of the drug to get the same effect
    Taking larger amounts of the drug over a longer period of time than you intended
    Making certain that you maintain a supply of the drug
    Spending money on the drug, even though you can't afford it
    Not meeting obligations and work responsibilities, or cutting back on social or recreational activities because of drug use
    Continuing to use the drug, even though you know it's causing problems in your life or causing you physical or psychological harm
    Doing things to get the drug that you normally wouldn't do, such as stealing
    Driving or doing other risky activities when you're under the influence of the drug
    Spending a good deal of time getting the drug, using the drug or recovering from the effects of the drug
    Failing in your attempts to stop using the drug
    Experiencing withdrawal symptoms when you attempt to stop taking the drug

Recognizing unhealthy drug use in family members

Sometimes it's difficult to distinguish normal teenage moodiness or anxiety from signs of drug use. Possible signs that your teenager or other family member is using drugs include:

    Problems at school or work — frequently missing school or work, a sudden disinterest in school activities or work, or a drop in grades or work performance
    Physical health issues — lack of energy and motivation, weight loss or gain, or red eyes
    Neglected appearance — lack of interest in clothing, grooming or looks
    Changes in behavior — major efforts to bar family members from entering the teenager's room or being secretive about going out with friends; or drastic changes in behavior and in relationships with family and friends
    Money issues — sudden requests for money without a reasonable explanation; or your discovery that money is missing or has been stolen or that items have disappeared from your home, indicating maybe they're being sold to support drug use

Recognizing signs of drug use or intoxication

Signs and symptoms of drug use or intoxication may vary, depending on the type of drug. Below you'll find several examples.
Marijuana, hashish and other cannabis-containing substances

People use cannabis by smoking, eating or inhaling a vaporized form of the drug. Cannabis often precedes or is used along with other substances, such as alcohol or illegal drugs, and is often the first drug tried.

Signs and symptoms of recent use can include:

    A sense of euphoria or feeling "high"
    A heightened sense of visual, auditory and taste perception
    Increased blood pressure and heart rate
    Red eyes
    Dry mouth
    Decreased coordination
    Difficulty concentrating or remembering
    Slowed reaction time
    Anxiety or paranoid thinking
    Cannabis odor on clothes or yellow fingertips
    Major cravings for certain foods at unusual times

Long-term use is often associated with:

    Decreased mental sharpness
    Poor performance at school or at work
    Ongoing cough and frequent lung infections

K2, Spice and bath salts

Two groups of synthetic drugs — synthetic cannabinoids and substituted or synthetic cathinones — are illegal in most states. The effects of these drugs can be dangerous and unpredictable, as there is no quality control and some ingredients may not be known.

Synthetic cannabinoids, also called K2 or Spice, are sprayed on dried herbs and then smoked, but can be prepared as an herbal tea. A liquid form can be vaporized in electronic cigarettes. Despite manufacturer claims, these are chemical compounds rather than "natural" or harmless products. These drugs can produce a "high" similar to marijuana and have become a popular but dangerous alternative.

Signs and symptoms of recent use can include:

    A sense of euphoria or feeling "high"
    Elevated mood
    An altered sense of visual, auditory and taste perception
    Extreme anxiety or agitation
    Paranoia
    Hallucinations
    Increased heart rate and blood pressure or heart attack
    Vomiting
    Confusion
    Violent behavior

Substituted cathinones, also called "bath salts," are mind-altering (psychoactive) substances similar to amphetamines such as ecstasy (MDMA) and cocaine. Packages are often labeled as other products to avoid detection.

Despite the name, these are not bath products such as Epsom salts. Substituted cathinones can be eaten, snorted, inhaled or injected and are highly addictive. These drugs can cause severe intoxication, which results in dangerous health effects or even death.

Signs and symptoms of recent use can include:

    Feeling "high"
    Increased sociability
    Increased energy and agitation
    Increased sex drive
    Increased heart rate and blood pressure
    Problems thinking clearly
    Loss of muscle control
    Paranoia
    Panic attacks
    Hallucinations
    Delirium
    Psychotic and violent behavior

Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and hypnotics

Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and hypnotics are prescription central nervous system depressants. They're often used and misused in search for a sense of relaxation or a desire to "switch off" or forget stress-related thoughts or feelings.

    Barbiturates. An example is phenobarbital.
    Benzodiazepines. Examples include sedatives, such as diazepam (Valium), alprazolam (Xanax), lorazepam (Ativan), clonazepam (Klonopin) and chlordiazepoxide (Librium).
    Hypnotics. Examples include prescription sleeping medicines such as zolpidem (Ambien) and zaleplon (Sonata).

Signs and symptoms of recent use can include:

    Drowsiness
    Slurred speech
    Lack of coordination
    Irritability or changes in mood
    Problems concentrating or thinking clearly
    Memory problems
    Involuntary eye movements
    Lack of inhibition
    Slowed breathing and reduced blood pressure
    Falls or accidents
    Dizziness

Meth, cocaine and other stimulants

Stimulants include amphetamines, meth (methamphetamine), cocaine, methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, others) and amphetamine-dextroamphetamine (Adderall XR, Mydayis). They're often used and misused in search of a "high," or to boost energy, to improve performance at work or school, or to lose weight or control appetite.

Signs and symptoms of recent use can include:

    Feeling of happy excitement and too much confidence
    Increased alertness
    Increased energy and restlessness
    Behavior changes or aggression
    Rapid or rambling speech
    Larger than usual pupils, the black circles in the middle of the eyes
    Confusion, delusions and hallucinations
    Irritability, anxiety or paranoia
    Changes in heart rate, blood pressure and body temperature
    Nausea or vomiting with weight loss
    Poor judgment
    Nasal congestion and damage to the mucous membrane of the nose (if snorting drugs)
    Mouth sores, gum disease and tooth decay from smoking drugs ("meth mouth")
    Insomnia
    Depression as the drug wears off

Club drugs

Club drugs are commonly used at clubs, concerts and parties. Examples include methylenedioxymethamphetamine, also called MDMA, ecstasy or molly, and gamma-hydroxybutyric acid, known as GHB. Other examples include ketamine and flunitrazepam or Rohypnol — a brand used outside the U.S. — also called roofie. These drugs are not all in the same category, but they share some similar effects and dangers, including long-term harmful effects.

Because GHB and flunitrazepam can cause sedation, muscle relaxation, confusion and memory loss, the potential for sexual misconduct or sexual assault is associated with the use of these drugs.

Signs and symptoms of use of club drugs can include:

    Hallucinations
    Paranoia
    Larger than usual pupils
    Chills and sweating
    Involuntary shaking (tremors)
    Behavior changes
    Muscle cramping and teeth clenching
    Muscle relaxation, poor coordination or problems moving
    Reduced inhibitions
    Heightened or altered sense of sight, sound and taste
    Poor judgment
    Memory problems or loss of memory
    Reduced consciousness
    Increased or decreased heart rate and blood pressure

Hallucinogens

Use of hallucinogens can produce different signs and symptoms, depending on the drug. The most common hallucinogens are lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP).

LSD use may cause:

    Hallucinations
    Greatly reduced perception of reality, for example, interpreting input from one of your senses as another, such as hearing colors
    Impulsive behavior
    Rapid shifts in emotions
    Permanent mental changes in perception
    Rapid heart rate and high blood pressure
    Tremors
    Flashbacks, a reexperience of the hallucinations — even years later

PCP use may cause:

    A feeling of being separated from your body and surroundings
    Hallucinations
    Problems with coordination and movement
    Aggressive, possibly violent behavior
    Involuntary eye movements
    Lack of pain sensation
    Increase in blood pressure and heart rate
    Problems with thinking and memory
    Problems speaking
    Poor judgment
    Intolerance to loud noise
    Sometimes seizures or coma

Inhalants

Signs and symptoms of inhalant use vary, depending on the substance. Some commonly inhaled substances include glue, paint thinners, correction fluid, felt tip marker fluid, gasoline, cleaning fluids and household aerosol products. Due to the toxic nature of these substances, users may develop brain damage or sudden death.

Signs and symptoms of use can include:

    Possessing an inhalant substance without a reasonable explanation
    Brief happy excitement
    Behaving as if drunk
    Reduced ability to keep impulses under control
    Aggressive behavior or eagerness to fight
    Dizziness
    Nausea or vomiting
    Involuntary eye movements
    Appearing under the influence of drugs, with slurred speech, slow movements and poor coordination
    Irregular heartbeats
    Tremors
    Lingering odor of inhalant material
    Rash around the nose and mouth

Opioid painkillers

Opioids are narcotic, painkilling drugs produced from opium or made synthetically. This class of drugs includes, among others, heroin, morphine, codeine, methadone, fentanyl and oxycodone.

Sometimes called the "opioid epidemic," addiction to opioid prescription pain medicines has reached an alarming rate across the United States. Some people who've been using opioids over a long period of time may need physician-prescribed temporary or long-term drug substitution during treatment.

Signs and symptoms of narcotic use and dependence can include:

    A sense of feeling "high"
    Reduced sense of pain
    Agitation, drowsiness or sedation
    Slurred speech
    Problems with attention and memory
    Pupils that are smaller than usual
    Lack of awareness or inattention to surrounding people and things
    Problems with coordination
    Depression
    Confusion
    Constipation
    Runny nose or nose sores (if snorting drugs)
    Needle marks (if injecting drugs)

When to see a doctor

If your drug use is out of control or causing problems, get help. The sooner you seek help, the greater your chances for a long-term recovery. Talk with your health care provider or see a mental health provider, such as a doctor who specializes in addiction medicine or addiction psychiatry, or a licensed alcohol and drug counselor.

Make an appointment to see a provider if:

    You can't stop using a drug
    You continue using the drug despite the harm it causes
    Your drug use has led to unsafe behavior, such as sharing needles or unprotected sex
    You think you may be having withdrawal symptoms after stopping drug use

If you're not ready to approach a health care provider or mental health professional, help lines or hotlines may be a good place to learn about treatment. You can find these lines listed on the internet or in the phone book.
When to seek emergency help

Seek emergency help if you or someone you know has taken a drug and:

    May have overdosed
    Shows changes in consciousness
    Has trouble breathing
    Has seizures or convulsions
    Has signs of a possible heart attack, such as chest pain or pressure
    Has any other troublesome physical or psychological reaction to use of the drug

Staging an intervention

People struggling with addiction usually deny they have a problem and hesitate to seek treatment. An intervention presents a loved one with a structured opportunity to make changes before things get even worse and can motivate someone to seek or accept help.

It's important to plan an intervention carefully. It may be done by family and friends in consultation with a health care provider or mental health professional such as a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, or directed by an intervention professional. It involves family and friends and sometimes co-workers, clergy or others who care about the person struggling with addiction.

During the intervention, these people gather together to have a direct, heart-to-heart conversation with the person about the consequences of addiction. Then they ask the person to accept treatment.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

Like many mental health disorders, several factors may contribute to development of drug addiction. The main factors are:

    Environment. Environmental factors, including your family's beliefs and attitudes and exposure to a peer group that encourages drug use, seem to play a role in initial drug use.
    Genetics. Once you've started using a drug, the development into addiction may be influenced by inherited (genetic) traits, which may delay or speed up the disease progression.

Changes in the brain

Physical addiction appears to occur when repeated use of a drug changes the way your brain feels pleasure. The addicting drug causes physical changes to some nerve cells (neurons) in your brain. Neurons use chemicals called neurotransmitters to communicate. These changes can remain long after you stop using the drug.
Risk factors

People of any age, sex or economic status can become addicted to a drug. Certain factors can affect the likelihood and speed of developing an addiction:

    Family history of addiction. Drug addiction is more common in some families and likely involves an increased risk based on genes. If you have a blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, with alcohol or drug addiction, you're at greater risk of developing a drug addiction.
    Mental health disorder. If you have a mental health disorder such as depression, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or post-traumatic stress disorder, you're more likely to become addicted to drugs. Using drugs can become a way of coping with painful feelings, such as anxiety, depression and loneliness, and can make these problems even worse.
    Peer pressure. Peer pressure is a strong factor in starting to use and misuse drugs, particularly for young people.
    Lack of family involvement. Difficult family situations or lack of a bond with your parents or siblings may increase the risk of addiction, as can a lack of parental supervision.
    Early use. Using drugs at an early age can cause changes in the developing brain and increase the likelihood of progressing to drug addiction.
    Taking a highly addictive drug. Some drugs, such as stimulants, cocaine or opioid painkillers, may result in faster development of addiction than other drugs. Smoking or injecting drugs can increase the potential for addiction. Taking drugs considered less addicting — so-called "light drugs" — can start you on a pathway of drug use and addiction.

Complications

Drug use can have significant and damaging short-term and long-term effects. Taking some drugs can be particularly risky, especially if you take high doses or combine them with other drugs or alcohol. Here are some examples.

    Methamphetamine, opiates and cocaine are highly addictive and cause multiple short-term and long-term health consequences, including psychotic behavior, seizures or death due to overdose. Opioid drugs affect the part of the brain that controls breathing, and overdose can result in death. Taking opioids with alcohol increases this risk.
    GHB and flunitrazepam may cause sedation, confusion and memory loss. These so-called "date rape drugs" are known to impair the ability to resist unwanted contact and recollection of the event. At high doses, they can cause seizures, coma and death. The danger increases when these drugs are taken with alcohol.
    MDMA — also known as molly or ecstasy — can interfere with the body's ability to regulate temperature. A severe spike in body temperature can result in liver, kidney or heart failure and death. Other complications can include severe dehydration, leading to seizures. Long-term, MDMA can damage the brain.
    One particular danger of club drugs is that the liquid, pill or powder forms of these drugs available on the street often contain unknown substances that can be harmful, including other illegally manufactured or pharmaceutical drugs.
    Due to the toxic nature of inhalants, users may develop brain damage of different levels of severity. Sudden death can occur even after a single exposure.

Other life-changing complications

Dependence on drugs can create a number of dangerous and damaging complications, including:

    Getting an infectious disease. People who are addicted to a drug are more likely to get an infectious disease, such as HIV, either through unsafe sex or by sharing needles with others.
    Other health problems. Drug addiction can lead to a range of both short-term and long-term mental and physical health problems. These depend on what drug is taken.
    Accidents. People who are addicted to drugs are more likely to drive or do other dangerous activities while under the influence.
    Suicide. People who are addicted to drugs die by suicide more often than people who aren't addicted.
    Family problems. Behavioral changes may cause relationship or family conflict and custody issues.
    Work issues. Drug use can cause declining performance at work, absenteeism and eventual loss of employment.
    Problems at school. Drug use can negatively affect academic performance and motivation to excel in school.
    Legal issues. Legal problems are common for drug users and can stem from buying or possessing illegal drugs, stealing to support the drug addiction, driving while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or disputes over child custody.
    Financial problems. Spending money to support drug use takes away money from other needs, could lead to debt, and can lead to illegal or unethical behaviors.

Prevention

The best way to prevent an addiction to a drug is not to take the drug at all. If your health care provider prescribes a drug with the potential for addiction, use care when taking the drug and follow instructions.

Health care providers should prescribe these medicines at safe doses and amounts and monitor their use so that you're not given too great a dose or for too long a time. If you feel you need to take more than the prescribed dose of a medicine, talk to your health care provider.
Preventing drug misuse in children and teenagers

Take these steps to help prevent drug misuse in your children and teenagers:

    Communicate. Talk to your children about the risks of drug use and misuse.
    Listen. Be a good listener when your children talk about peer pressure and be supportive of their efforts to resist it.
    Set a good example. Don't misuse alcohol or addictive drugs. Children of parents who misuse drugs are at greater risk of drug addiction.
    Strengthen the bond. Work on your relationship with your children. A strong, stable bond between you and your child will reduce your child's risk of using or misusing drugs.

Preventing a relapse

Once you've been addicted to a drug, you're at high risk of falling back into a pattern of addiction. If you do start using the drug, it's likely you'll lose control over its use again — even if you've had treatment and you haven't used the drug for some time.

    Follow your treatment plan. Monitor your cravings. It may seem like you've recovered and you don't need to keep taking steps to stay drug-free. But your chances of staying drug-free will be much higher if you continue seeing your therapist or counselor, going to support group meetings and taking prescribed medicine.
    Avoid high-risk situations. Don't go back to the neighborhood where you used to get your drugs. And stay away from your old drug crowd.
    Get help immediately if you use the drug again. If you start using the drug again, talk to your health care provider, your mental health provider or someone else who can help you right away.

Oct. 04, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Drug addiction (substance use disorder) - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
8–10 minutes
Diagnosis

Diagnosing drug addiction (substance use disorder) requires a thorough evaluation and often includes an assessment by a psychiatrist, a psychologist, or a licensed alcohol and drug counselor. Blood, urine or other lab tests are used to assess drug use, but they're not a diagnostic test for addiction. However, these tests may be used for monitoring treatment and recovery.

For diagnosis of a substance use disorder, most mental health professionals use criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association.
Treatment

Although there's no cure for drug addiction, treatment options can help you overcome an addiction and stay drug-free. Your treatment depends on the drug used and any related medical or mental health disorders you may have. Long-term follow-up is important to prevent relapse.
Treatment programs

Treatment programs for substance use disorder usually offer:

    Individual, group or family therapy sessions
    A focus on understanding the nature of addiction, becoming drug-free and preventing relapse
    Levels of care and settings that vary depending on your needs, such as outpatient, residential and inpatient programs

Withdrawal therapy

The goal of detoxification, also called "detox" or withdrawal therapy, is to enable you to stop taking the addicting drug as quickly and safely as possible. For some people, it may be safe to undergo withdrawal therapy on an outpatient basis. Others may need admission to a hospital or a residential treatment center.

Withdrawal from different categories of drugs — such as depressants, stimulants or opioids — produces different side effects and requires different approaches. Detox may involve gradually reducing the dose of the drug or temporarily substituting other substances, such as methadone, buprenorphine, or a combination of buprenorphine and naloxone.
Opioid overdose

In an opioid overdose, a medicine called naloxone can be given by emergency responders, or in some states, by anyone who witnesses an overdose. Naloxone temporarily reverses the effects of opioid drugs.

While naloxone has been on the market for years, a nasal spray (Narcan, Kloxxado) and an injectable form are now available, though they can be very expensive. Whatever the method of delivery, seek immediate medical care after using naloxone.
Medicine as part of treatment

After discussion with you, your health care provider may recommend medicine as part of your treatment for opioid addiction. Medicines don't cure your opioid addiction, but they can help in your recovery. These medicines can reduce your craving for opioids and may help you avoid relapse. Medicine treatment options for opioid addiction may include buprenorphine, methadone, naltrexone, and a combination of buprenorphine and naloxone.
Behavior therapy

As part of a drug treatment program, behavior therapy — a form of psychotherapy — can be done by a psychologist or psychiatrist, or you may receive counseling from a licensed alcohol and drug counselor. Therapy and counseling may be done with an individual, a family or a group. The therapist or counselor can:

    Help you develop ways to cope with your drug cravings
    Suggest strategies to avoid drugs and prevent relapse
    Offer suggestions on how to deal with a relapse if it occurs
    Talk about issues regarding your job, legal problems, and relationships with family and friends
    Include family members to help them develop better communication skills and be supportive
    Address other mental health conditions

Self-help groups

Many, though not all, self-help support groups use the 12-step model first developed by Alcoholics Anonymous. Self-help support groups, such as Narcotics Anonymous, help people who are addicted to drugs.

The self-help support group message is that addiction is an ongoing disorder with a danger of relapse. Self-help support groups can decrease the sense of shame and isolation that can lead to relapse.

Your therapist or licensed counselor can help you locate a self-help support group. You may also find support groups in your community or on the internet.
Ongoing treatment

Even after you've completed initial treatment, ongoing treatment and support can help prevent a relapse. Follow-up care can include periodic appointments with your counselor, continuing in a self-help program or attending a regular group session. Seek help right away if you relapse.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Coping and support

Overcoming an addiction and staying drug-free require a persistent effort. Learning new coping skills and knowing where to find help are essential. Taking these actions can help:

    See a licensed therapist or licensed drug and alcohol counselor. Drug addiction is linked to many problems that may be helped with therapy or counseling, including other underlying mental health concerns or marriage or family problems. Seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist or licensed counselor may help you regain your peace of mind and mend your relationships.
    Seek treatment for other mental health disorders. People with other mental health problems, such as depression, are more likely to become addicted to drugs. Seek immediate treatment from a qualified mental health professional if you have any signs or symptoms of mental health problems.
    Join a support group. Support groups, such as Narcotics Anonymous or Alcoholics Anonymous, can be very effective in coping with addiction. Compassion, understanding and shared experiences can help you break your addiction and stay drug-free.

Preparing for your appointment

It may help to get an independent perspective from someone you trust and who knows you well. You can start by discussing your substance use with your primary care provider. Or ask for a referral to a specialist in drug addiction, such as a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, or a psychiatrist or psychologist. Take a relative or friend along.

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do

Before your appointment, be prepared:

    Be honest about your drug use. When you engage in unhealthy drug use, it can be easy to downplay or underestimate how much you use and your level of addiction. To get an accurate idea of which treatment may help, be honest with your health care provider or mental health provider.
    Make a list of all medicines, vitamins, herbs or other supplements that you're taking, and the dosages. Tell your health care provider and mental health provider about any legal or illegal drugs you're using.
    Make a list of questions to ask your health care provider or mental health provider.

Some questions to ask your provider may include:

    What's the best approach to my drug addiction?
    Should I see a psychiatrist or other mental health professional?
    Will I need to go to the hospital or spend time as an inpatient or outpatient at a recovery clinic?
    What are the alternatives to the primary approach that you're suggesting?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your provider is likely to ask you several questions, such as:

    What drugs do you use?
    When did your drug use first start?
    How often do you use drugs?
    When you take a drug, how much do you use?
    Do you ever feel that you might have a problem with drugs?
    Have you tried to quit on your own? What happened when you did?
    If you tried to quit, did you have withdrawal symptoms?
    Have any family members criticized your drug use?
    Are you ready to get the treatment needed for your drug addiction?

Be ready to answer questions so you'll have more time to go over any points you want to focus on.

Oct. 04, 2022

mayoclinic.org
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) - Symptoms and causes
Print
8–10 minutes
Overview

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) features a pattern of unwanted thoughts and fears known as obsessions. These obsessions lead you to do repetitive behaviors, also called compulsions. These obsessions and compulsions get in the way of daily activities and cause a lot of distress.

Ultimately, you feel driven to do compulsive acts to ease your stress. Even if you try to ignore or get rid of bothersome thoughts or urges, they keep coming back. This leads you to act based on ritual. This is the vicious cycle of OCD.

OCD often centers around certain themes, such as being overly fearful of getting contaminated by germs. To ease contamination fears, you may wash your hands over and over again until they're sore and chapped.

If you have OCD, you may be ashamed, embarrassed and frustrated about the condition. But treatment can be effective.
Symptoms

Obsessive-compulsive disorder usually includes both obsessions and compulsions. But it's also possible to have only obsession symptoms or only compulsion symptoms. You may or may not know that your obsessions and compulsions are beyond reason. But they take up a great deal of time, reduce your quality of life, and get in the way of your daily routines and responsibilities.
Obsession symptoms

OCD obsessions are lasting and unwanted thoughts that keeping coming back or urges or images that are intrusive and cause distress or anxiety. You might try to ignore them or get rid of them by acting based on ritual. These obsessions usually intrude when you're trying to think of or do other things.

Obsessions often have themes, such as:

    Fear of contamination or dirt.
    Doubting and having a hard time dealing with uncertainty.
    Needing things to be orderly and balanced.
    Aggressive or horrific thoughts about losing control and harming yourself or others.
    Unwanted thoughts, including aggression, or sexual or religious subjects.

Examples of obsession symptoms include:

    Fear of being contaminated by touching objects others have touched.
    Doubts that you've locked the door or turned off the stove.
    Intense stress when objects aren't orderly or facing a certain way.
    Images of driving your car into a crowd of people.
    Thoughts about shouting obscenities or not acting the right way in public.
    Unpleasant sexual images.
    Staying away from situations that can cause obsessions, such as shaking hands.

Compulsion symptoms

OCD compulsions are repetitive behaviors that you feel driven to do. These repetitive behaviors or mental acts are meant to reduce anxiety related to your obsessions or prevent something bad from happening. But taking part in the compulsions brings no pleasure and may offer only limited relief from anxiety.

You may make up rules or rituals to follow that help control your anxiety when you're having obsessive thoughts. These compulsions are beyond reason and often don't relate to the issue they're intended to fix.

As with obsessions, compulsions usually have themes, such as:

    Washing and cleaning.
    Checking.
    Counting.
    Ordering.
    Following a strict routine.
    Demanding reassurance.

Examples of compulsion symptoms include:

    Hand-washing until your skin becomes raw.
    Checking doors over and over again to make sure they're locked.
    Checking the stove over and over again to make sure it's off.
    Counting in certain patterns.
    Silently repeating a prayer, word or phrase.
    Trying to replace a bad thought with a good thought.
    Arranging your canned goods to face the same way.

Severity varies

OCD usually begins in the teen or young adult years, but it can start in childhood. Symptoms usually begin over time and tend to vary in how serious they are throughout life. The types of obsessions and compulsions you have also can change over time. Symptoms generally get worse when you are under greater stress, including times of transition and change. OCD, usually thought to be a lifelong disorder, can have mild to moderate symptoms or be so severe and time-consuming that it becomes disabling.
When to see a doctor

There's a difference between being a perfectionist — someone who needs flawless results or performance — and having OCD. OCD thoughts aren't simply excessive worries about real issues in your life or liking to have things clean or arranged in a specific way.

If your obsessions and compulsions affect your quality of life, see your doctor or mental health professional.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Causes

The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder isn't fully understood. Main theories include:

    Biology. OCD may be due to changes in your body's natural chemistry or brain functions.
    Genetics. OCD may have a genetic component, but specific genes have yet to be found.
    Learning. Obsessive fears and compulsive behaviors can be learned from watching family members or learning them over time.

Risk factors

Factors that may raise the risk of causing obsessive-compulsive disorder include:

    Family history. Having parents or other family members with the disorder can raise your risk of getting OCD.
    Stressful life events. If you've gone through traumatic or stressful events, your risk may increase. This reaction may cause the intrusive thoughts, rituals and emotional distress seen in OCD.
    Other mental health disorders. OCD may be related to other mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorders, depression, substance abuse or tic disorders.

Complications

Issues due to obsessive-compulsive disorder include:

    Excessive time spent taking part in ritualistic behaviors.
    Health issues, such as contact dermatitis from frequent hand-washing.
    Having a hard time going to work or school or taking part in social activities.
    Troubled relationships.
    Poor quality of life.
    Thoughts about suicide and behavior related to suicide.

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent obsessive-compulsive disorder. However, getting treated as soon as possible may help keep OCD from getting worse and disrupting activities and your daily routine.

Dec. 21, 2023

mayoclinic.org
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
12–15 minutes
Diagnosis

Steps to help diagnose obsessive-compulsive disorder may include:

    Psychological evaluation. This includes talking about your thoughts, feelings, symptoms and behavior patterns to find out if you have obsessions or compulsive behaviors that get in the way of your quality of life. With your permission, this may include talking to your family or friends.
    Physical exam. This may be done to rule out other issues that could cause your symptoms and check for any related complications.

Diagnostic challenges

It's sometimes hard to diagnose OCD because symptoms can be like those of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, anxiety disorders, depression, schizophrenia or other mental health disorders. And it's possible to have OCD and another mental health disorder. Work with your doctor so that you can get the right diagnosis and treatment.
Treatment

Obsessive-compulsive disorder treatment may not result in a cure. But it can help bring symptoms under control so that they don't rule your daily life. Depending on how serious your OCD is, you may need long-term, ongoing or more-intensive treatment.

The two main treatments for OCD are psychotherapy and medicines. Psychotherapy also is known as talk therapy. Often, a mix of both treatments is most effective.
Psychotherapy

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of psychotherapy, is effective for many people with OCD. Exposure and response prevention (ERP), a part of CBT therapy, involves exposing you over time to a feared object or obsession, such as dirt. Then you learn ways not to do your compulsive rituals. ERP takes effort and practice, but you may enjoy a better quality of life once you learn to manage your obsessions and compulsions.
Medicines

Certain psychiatric medicines can help control the obsessions and compulsions of OCD. Most commonly, antidepressants are tried first.

Antidepressants approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat OCD include:

    Fluoxetine (Prozac) for adults and children 7 years and older.
    Fluvoxamine (Luvox) for adults and children 8 years and older.
    Paroxetine (Paxil) for adults only.
    Sertraline (Zoloft) for adults and children 6 years and older.
    Clomipramine (Anafranil) for adults and children 10 years and older.

However, your doctor may prescribe other antidepressants and psychiatric medicines.
Medicines: What to consider

When talking with your doctor about medicines for OCD, consider:

    Medicine selection. In general, the goal is to effectively control symptoms at the lowest possible dose. OCD may sometimes require higher doses of medicines to be the most effective in controlling your symptoms. It's not unusual to try several drugs before finding one that works well. Your doctor might recommend more than one medicine to effectively manage your symptoms. It can take weeks to months to get better after starting a medicine for your symptoms.
    Side effects. All psychiatric medicines may have side effects. Talk to your doctor about possible side effects and about any health monitoring needed while taking psychiatric drugs. And let your doctor know if you have troubling side effects.
    Suicide risk. Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the FDA requires that all antidepressants carry black box warnings. These are the strictest warnings for prescriptions. In some cases, children, teenagers and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This is especially true in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. If suicidal thoughts occur, contact your doctor or get emergency help at once. Keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to lower suicide risk in the long run by making your mood better.
    Interactions with other substances. When taking an antidepressant, tell your doctor about any other prescription medicines available without a prescription, herbs or other supplements you take. Some antidepressants can make some other medicines less effective and cause dangerous reactions when combined with certain medicines or herbal supplements.
    Stopping antidepressants. Antidepressants aren't thought to be addictive, but sometimes physical dependence can occur. Stopping treatment suddenly or missing several doses can cause withdrawal-like symptoms. This is sometimes called discontinuation syndrome. Don't stop taking your medicine without talking to your doctor, even if you're feeling better. You may have a relapse of OCD symptoms. Work with your doctor to lower your dose safely over time.

Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using specific medicines.
Other treatment

Sometimes, psychotherapy and medicines can't control OCD symptoms. In cases that don't respond to treatment, other options may be offered:

    Intensive outpatient and residential treatment programs. Full treatment programs that stress ERP therapy principles may help people with OCD who struggle with being able to function because of how serious their symptoms are. These programs usually last several weeks.
    Deep brain stimulation (DBS). The FDA has approved DBS to treat OCD in adults ages 18 years and older who don't respond to traditional treatment. DBS involves implanting electrodes within certain areas of your brain. These electrodes produce electrical impulses that may help control impulses that aren't typical. DBS isn't widely available, and it is rarely used.
    Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). The FDA has approved three TMS devices — BrainsWay, MagVenture and NeuroStar — to treat OCD in adults. These devices are used when traditional treatment hasn't been effective. TMS doesn't require surgery. It uses magnetic fields to stimulate nerve cells in the brain to make symptoms of OCD better. During a TMS session, an electromagnetic coil is placed against your scalp near your forehead. The coil delivers a magnetic pulse that stimulates nerve cells in your brain.

If you're thinking about DBS or TMS, talk with your doctor to make sure you understand all the pros and cons and possible health risks.
More Information

    Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) care at Mayo Clinic
    Cognitive behavioral therapy
    Deep brain stimulation
    Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
    Psychotherapy
    Transcranial magnetic stimulation

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Lifestyle and home remedies

Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a chronic condition, which means that it may always be part of your life. While a professional should treat OCD, you can do some things to build on your treatment plan:

    Practice what you learn. Work with your mental health professional to pinpoint methods to help manage symptoms. Practice these methods regularly.
    Take your medicines as directed. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medicines. If you stop, OCD symptoms are likely to return.
    Pay attention to warning signs. You and your doctor may have pinpointed issues that can cause your OCD symptoms. Make a plan so that you know what to do if symptoms return. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel.
    Check first before taking other medicines. Contact the doctor who's treating you for OCD before you take medicines prescribed by another doctor or before taking any medicines available without a prescription, vitamins, herbal remedies or other supplements. This will help reduce possible interactions.

Coping and support

Coping with obsessive-compulsive disorder can be challenging. Medicines can have unwanted side effects, and you may feel embarrassed or angry about having a condition that requires long-term treatment.

Here are some ways to help cope with OCD:

    Learn about OCD. Learning about your condition can help you stick to your treatment plan.
    Stay focused on your goals. Keep your recovery goals in mind, and remember that recovery from OCD is an ongoing process.
    Join a support group. Reaching out to others facing similar challenges can provide you with support and help you cope with challenges.
    Find healthy outlets. Explore healthy ways to channel your energy, such as hobbies and recreational activities. Exercise regularly, eat a healthy diet and get adequate sleep.
    Learn relaxation and stress management. In addition to professional treatment, stress management methods such as meditation, visualization, muscle relaxation, massage, deep breathing, yoga or tai chi may ease stress and anxiety.
    Stick with your regular activities. Try not to avoid meaningful activities. Go to work or school as you usually would. Spend time with family and friends. Don't let OCD get in the way of your life.

Preparing for your appointment

You may start by seeing your primary care team. Because obsessive-compulsive disorder often requires specialized care, you may need to see a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist.
What you can do

To prepare for your appointment, think about your needs and goals for treatment. Make a list of:

    Any symptoms you've noticed, including the types of obsessions and compulsions you've had and things that you may be staying away from or no longer doing because of your distress.
    Key personal information, including any major stresses, recent life changes and family members with similar symptoms.
    All medicines, vitamins, herbal remedies or other supplements, as well as the doses.
    Questions to ask your doctor or therapist.

Questions to ask might include:

    Do you think I have OCD?
    How do you treat OCD?
    How can treatment help me?
    Are there medicines that might help?
    Will exposure and response prevention therapy help?
    How long will treatment take?
    What can I do to help myself?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have?
    Can you recommend any websites?

Don't hesitate to ask any other questions during your appointment.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor is likely to ask you some questions, such as:

    Do certain thoughts go through your mind over and over despite trying to ignore them?
    Do you have to have things arranged in a certain way?
    Do you have to wash your hands, count things, or check things over and over?
    When did your symptoms start?
    Have symptoms been continuous or once in a while?
    What, if anything, seems to improve the symptoms?
    What, if anything, appears to make the symptoms worse?
    How do the symptoms affect your daily life? Do you stay away from anything because of your symptoms?
    In a typical day, how much time do you spend on obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors?
    Have any of your relatives had a mental health disorder?
    Have you had any trauma or major stress?

Your doctor or mental health professional will ask more questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing for questions like these will help you make the most of your appointment time.

Dec. 21, 2023
