NIMH
Suicide Prevention
What is suicide?
Suicide is a major public health concern. In 2021, suicide was the 11th leading cause of death overall, claiming the lives of over 48,100 people. Suicide is complicated and tragic, but it is often preventable. Knowing the warning signs for suicide and how to get help can help save lives.

Suicide is when people harm themselves with the intent of ending their life, and they die as a result.

A suicide attempt is when people harm themselves with the intent of ending their life, but they do not die.

Avoid using terms such as “committing suicide,” “successful suicide,” or “failed suicide” when referring to suicide and suicide attempts, as these terms often carry negative meanings.

What are the warning signs of suicide?
Warning signs that someone may be at immediate risk for attempting suicide include:

Talking about wanting to die or wanting to kill themselves
Talking about feeling empty or hopeless or having no reason to live
Talking about feeling trapped or feeling that there are no solutions
Feeling unbearable emotional or physical pain
Talking about being a burden to others
Withdrawing from family and friends
Giving away important possessions
Saying goodbye to friends and family
Putting affairs in order, such as making a will
Taking great risks that could lead to death, such as driving extremely fast
Talking or thinking about death often
Other serious warning signs that someone may be at risk for attempting suicide include:

Displaying extreme mood swings, suddenly changing from very sad to very calm or happy
Making a plan or looking for ways to kill themselves, such as searching for lethal methods online, stockpiling pills, or buying a gun
Talking about feeling great guilt or shame
Using alcohol or drugs more often
Acting anxious or agitated
Changing eating or sleeping habits
Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
Suicide is not a normal response to stress. Suicidal thoughts or actions are a sign of extreme distress and should not be ignored.. If these warning signs apply to you or someone you know, get help as soon as possible, particularly if the behavior is new or has increased recently.

Here are five steps you can take to #BeThe1To help someone in emotional pain:

Presents five steps for helping someone in emotional pain in order to prevent suicide: Ask, Keep Them Safe, Be There, Help Them Connect, and Stay Connected. 
ASK: “Are you thinking about killing yourself?” It’s not an easy question, but studies show that asking at-risk individuals  if they are suicidal does not increase suicides or suicidal thoughts.
KEEP THEM SAFE: Reducing a suicidal person’s access to highly lethal items or places is an important part of suicide prevention. While this is not always easy, asking if the at-risk person has a plan and removing or disabling the lethal means can make a difference.
BE THERE: Listen carefully and learn what the individual is thinking and feeling. Research suggests acknowledging and talking about suicide  may reduce rather than increase  suicidal thoughts.
HELP THEM CONNECT: Save the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline number (call or text 988) in your phone so they’re there if you need them. You can also help make a connection with a trusted individual like a family member, friend, spiritual advisor, or mental health professional.
STAY CONNECTED: Staying in touch after a crisis or after being discharged from care can make a difference. Studies have shown  the number of suicide deaths goes down when someone follows up with the at-risk person.
What are the risk factors for suicide?
People of all genders, ages, and ethnicities can be at risk. Suicidal behavior is complex, and there is no single cause. The main risk factors for suicide are:

Depression, other mental disorders, or substance use disorder
Chronic pain
Personal history of suicide attempts
Family history of a mental disorder or substance use
Family history of suicide
Exposure to family violence, including physical or sexual abuse
Presence of guns or other firearms in the home
Having recently been released from prison or jail
For people with suicidal thoughts, exposure, either directly or indirectly, to others' suicidal behavior, such as that of family members, peers, or celebrities can also be a risk factor.

Most people who have risk factors will not attempt suicide, and it is difficult to tell who will act on suicidal thoughts. Although risk factors for suicide are important to keep in mind, someone who is actively showing warning signs of suicide may be at higher risk for danger and in need immediate attention.

Stressful life events (such as the loss of a loved one, legal troubles, or financial difficulties) and interpersonal stressors (such as shame, harassment, bullying, discrimination, or relationship troubles) may contribute to suicide risk, especially when they occur along with suicide risk factors.

Family and friends are often the first to recognize the warning signs of suicide, and they can take the first step toward helping a loved one find mental health treatment. See NIMH’s page with resources for finding help for mental illnesses if you're not sure where to start.

Identifying people at risk for suicide

Universal screening: Research has shown that a three-question screening tool helps emergency room personnel identify adults at risk for suicide . Researchers found that screening all patients—regardless of the reason for their emergency room visit—doubled the number of patients identified as being at risk for suicide. The researchers estimated that suicide-risk screening tools could identify more than three million additional adults at risk for suicide each year.
Predicting suicide risk using electronic health records: Researchers from NIMH partnered with the VA and others to develop computer programs that could help predict suicide risk among veterans receiving VA health care . Other healthcare systems are also beginning to use data from electronic health records to help identify people with suicide risk.
What treatments and therapies are available for people at risk for suicide?
Effective, evidence-based interventions are available to help people who are at risk for suicide.

Brief interventions
Safety planning: Personalized safety planning  has been shown to help reduce suicidal thoughts and actions. Patients work with a health care provider to develop a plan that describes ways to limit access to lethal means such as firearms, pills, or poisons. The plan also lists coping strategies and people and resources that can help in a crisis.
Follow-up phone calls: Research has shown that when at-risk patients receive supportive phone calls for further risk monitoring and are encouraged to engage in safe behaviors and seek help, their suicide risk goes down .
Psychotherapies
Multiple types of psychosocial interventions have been found to help individuals who have attempted suicide (see below). These types of interventions may prevent someone from making another attempt.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help people learn new ways of dealing with stressful experiences. CBT helps individuals recognize their thought patterns and consider alternative actions when thoughts of suicide arise .
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) has been shown to reduce suicidal behavior in adolescents. DBT has also been shown to reduce the risk of suicide attempts in adults with borderline personality disorder , a mental illness characterized by an ongoing pattern of varying moods, self-image, and behavior that often results in impulsive actions and problems in relationships. A therapist trained in DBT can help a person recognize when their feelings or actions become overwhelming and teach the person skills that can help them cope more effectively with upsetting situations.
Medication
Some individuals at risk for suicide might benefit from medication. People can work with their health care providers to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Many people at risk for suicide often have a mental illness or substance use problems and may benefit from medication along with psychosocial intervention.

Clozapine is an antipsychotic medication used primarily to treat individuals with schizophrenia. To date, it is the only medication with a specific U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) indication  for reducing the risk of recurrent suicidal behavior in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.

If you are prescribed a medication, be sure you:

Talk with a health care provider to make sure you understand the risks and benefits of the medications you're taking.
Do not stop taking a medication without talking to your health care provider first. Suddenly stopping a medication may lead to worsening of symptoms. Other uncomfortable or potentially dangerous withdrawal effects also are possible.
Report any concerns about side effects to a health care provider right away. They can help determine whether you need a change in the dose or a different medication.
Report serious side effects to the FDA MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program  online or by phone at 1-800-332-1088. You or your health care provider may send a report.
To find the latest information about medications, talk to a health care provider and visit the FDA website .

Collaborative care
Collaborative care is a team-based approach to mental health care. A behavioral health care manager will work with the person, their primary health care provider, and mental health specialists to develop a treatment plan. Collaborative care has been shown to be an effective way to treat depression and reduce suicidal thoughts.

How can I find help for mental health concerns?
If you’re not sure where to get help, a health care provider can refer you to a licensed mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Find tips to help prepare for and get the most out of your visit and information about getting help.

The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration has an online treatment locator  to help you find mental health services in your area

mayoclinic.org
Suicide and suicidal thoughts - Symptoms and causes
Print
13–17 minutes
Overview

Suicide, taking your own life, is a tragic reaction to stressful life situations — and all the more tragic because suicide can be prevented. Whether you're considering suicide or know someone who feels suicidal, learn suicide warning signs and how to reach out for immediate help and professional treatment. You may save a life — your own or someone else's.

It may seem like there's no way to solve your problems and that suicide is the only way to end the pain. But you can take steps to stay safe — and start enjoying your life again.
For immediate help

If you're feeling overwhelmed by thoughts of not wanting to live or you're having urges to attempt suicide, get help now.

    Call a suicide hotline.
        In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat at 988lifeline.org/chat/. Services are free and confidential.
        If you’re a U.S. veteran or service member in crisis, call 988 and then press 1, or text 838255. Or chat using veteranscrisisline.net/get-help-now/chat/.
        The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454.
    Call 911 in the U.S. or your local emergency number immediately.

Symptoms

Suicide warning signs or suicidal thoughts include:

    Talking about suicide — for example, making statements such as "I'm going to kill myself," "I wish I were dead" or "I wish I hadn't been born"
    Getting the means to take your own life, such as buying a gun or stockpiling pills
    Withdrawing from social contact and wanting to be left alone
    Having mood swings, such as being emotionally high one day and deeply discouraged the next
    Being preoccupied with death, dying or violence
    Feeling trapped or hopeless about a situation
    Increasing use of alcohol or drugs
    Changing normal routine, including eating or sleeping patterns
    Doing risky or self-destructive things, such as using drugs or driving recklessly
    Giving away belongings or getting affairs in order when there's no other logical explanation for doing this
    Saying goodbye to people as if they won't be seen again
    Developing personality changes or being severely anxious or agitated, particularly when experiencing some of the warning signs listed above

Warning signs aren't always obvious, and they may vary from person to person. Some people make their intentions clear, while others keep suicidal thoughts and feelings secret.
When to see a doctor

If you're feeling suicidal, but you aren't immediately thinking of hurting yourself:

    Reach out to a close friend or loved one — even though it may be hard to talk about your feelings
    Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone in your faith community
    Call a suicide hotline
    Make an appointment with your doctor, other health care provider or a mental health professional

Suicidal thinking doesn't get better on its own — so get help.
Causes

Suicidal thoughts have many causes. Most often, suicidal thoughts are the result of feeling like you can't cope when you're faced with what seems to be an overwhelming life situation. If you don't have hope for the future, you may mistakenly think suicide is a solution. You may experience a sort of tunnel vision, where in the middle of a crisis you believe suicide is the only way out.

There also may be a genetic link to suicide. People who complete suicide or who have suicidal thoughts or behavior are more likely to have a family history of suicide.
Risk factors

Although attempted suicide is more frequent for women, men are more likely than women to complete suicide because they typically use more-lethal methods, such as a firearm.

You may be at risk of suicide if you:

    Attempted suicide before
    Feel hopeless, worthless, agitated, socially isolated or lonely
    Experience a stressful life event, such as the loss of a loved one, military service, a breakup, or financial or legal problems
    Have a substance abuse problem — alcohol and drug abuse can worsen thoughts of suicide and make you feel reckless or impulsive enough to act on your thoughts
    Have suicidal thoughts and have access to firearms in your home
    Have an underlying psychiatric disorder, such as major depression, post-traumatic stress disorder or bipolar disorder
    Have a family history of mental disorders, substance abuse, suicide, or violence, including physical or sexual abuse
    Have a medical condition that can be linked to depression and suicidal thinking, such as chronic disease, chronic pain or terminal illness
    Are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender with an unsupportive family or in a hostile environment

Children and teenagers

Suicide in children and teenagers can follow stressful life events. What a young person sees as serious and insurmountable may seem minor to an adult — such as problems in school or the loss of a friendship. In some cases, a child or teen may feel suicidal due to certain life circumstances that he or she may not want to talk about, such as:

    Having a psychiatric disorder, including depression
    Loss or conflict with close friends or family members
    History of physical or sexual abuse
    Problems with alcohol or drugs
    Physical or medical issues, for example, becoming pregnant or having a sexually transmitted infection
    Being the victim of bullying
    Being uncertain of sexual orientation
    Reading or hearing an account of suicide or knowing a peer who died by suicide

If you have concerns about a friend or family member, asking about suicidal thoughts and intentions is the best way to identify risk.
Murder and suicide

In rare cases, people who are suicidal are at risk of killing others and then themselves. Known as a homicide-suicide or murder-suicide, some risk factors include:

    History of conflict with a spouse or romantic partner
    Current family legal or financial problems
    History of mental health problems, particularly depression
    Alcohol or drug abuse
    Having access to a firearm

Starting antidepressants and increased suicide risk

Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the Food and Drug Administration requires that all antidepressants carry black box warnings, the strictest warnings for prescriptions. In some cases, children, teenagers and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed.

However, keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long run by improving mood.
Teen suicide prevention

Female 1: I have my ups and downs just like anybody else.

Male 1: Maybe more than anybody else.

Female 2: I can be hard to figure out

Male 2: and I like my privacy.

Male 3: I don't want you looking over my shoulder all the time.

Female 3: But you know your kid better than anybody else and if you think he's acting different than usual,

Male 1: acting really down, crying all the time for no good reason

Female 2: or getting really mad,

Female 1: not able to sleep or sleeping too much,

Male 3: shutting their friends out or giving their stuff away,

Female 2: acting reckless, drinking, using drugs, staying out late,

Male 2: suddenly not doing stuff they used to love

Female 3: or doing stuff that's just not like him,

Male 1: it might be nothing to worry about. It might just be high school

Female 1: or it might be something more. He might be depressed.

Female 3: Not just feeling down, really depressed.

Male 2: It might be that your kid is thinking about killing himself.

Male 3: It happens more than you think, more than it should.

Female 3: And people say "I had no idea."

Male 1: "I thought it was just a phase he was going through."

Female 1: "I never thought she'd do it."

Male 2: "I wish he'd come to me."

Female 2: "I wish he had said something."

Male 3: "I wish I'd said something."

Female 3: when it's too late. So if you think your kids acting different, if she seems like a different person, say something.

Male 1: Say "What's wrong? How can I help?"

Female 2: and ask him straight out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"

Female 1: It doesn't hurt to ask. In fact, it helps.

Male 3: When people are thinking about killing themselves, they want somebody to ask.

Male 2: They want somebody to care.

Female 2: Maybe you're afraid you'll make it worse if you ask. Like you'll put the idea in their head.

Male 3: Believe me, it doesn't work that way.

Female 1: It doesn't hurt to ask.

Female 3: In fact, the best way to keep a teenager from killing herself is to ask, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"

Male 1: And what if they say "yes"

Female 2: or "maybe"

Male 2: or "sometimes?"

Female 3: Well, here's what you don't say,

Male 3: "That's crazy."

Female 2: "Don't be such a drama queen."

Male 3: "You're making too much of this."

Female 1: "That boy's not worth killing yourself over."

Female 3: "It's not going to solve anything."

Male 1: "You're just trying to get attention."

Male 2: "You're not going to kill yourself."

Male 3: What you do say is

Female 2: "I'm sorry you're feeling so bad."

Female 1: "How can I help?"

Female 3: "We'll get through this together."

Male 1: "Let's keep you safe."

Male 2: A lot of people think about killing themselves, adults and kids.

Male 3: Most of them never tried but some of them do, so if your kid says,

Female 2: "I'd be better off dead."

Female 3: "I can't live with this."

Male 3: "I'm gonna kill myself."

Male 2: take her seriously. Find someone she can talk to about it. Someone who knows how to help.

Female 2: Sometimes kids want to kill themselves because something happened--a breakup, a failure,

Female 1: but sometimes it goes deeper and it's not going to go away by itself.

Female 3: Get some help. Talk to your doctor,

Male 2: or a counselor at school,

Male 1: or your minister,

Male 3: but don't just let it drop,

Female 1: and make sure that your kid always has someone to turn to. Someone he trusts.

Female 3: Make a list together. Write down three, four, five names

Male 1: and put a suicide hotline number on there, too.

Male 3: Have him keep that list in his wallet so he always knows where to turn.

Female 3: Make sure your home is safe.

Female 2: If you have pills she could use to hurt herself, lock them up.

Male 2: If you have a gun, don't just lock it up. Get it out of the house, the bullets too.

Male 1: And one more thing, if you think your kid might be about to hurt himself, don't leave him alone.

Female 1: Take him to the emergency room.

Male 3: Call 9-1-1 if you have to.

Male 1: We all have our ups and downs but sometimes it's more than that.

Female 3: If you think something's wrong, the only way to find out is to ask.

Female 2: Ask straight-out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"

Male 2: Don't wait until you're sure. Trust your gut.

Male 3: Because it never hurts to ask

Female 1: and it can make a big difference,

Female 2: all the difference

Female 3: in your kid's life.
Reach out — Preventing teen suicide

[Music playing]

[Woman singing]

[Song lyrics]

I know what it feels like to say I'm so cold. One without the other. Lost in that hole. Don't think you are all alone. You have somewhere to go. This ain't a one-person show. Let someone out there lend you a hand. Don't go through this alone.

Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands.

Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands. Reach out to them. Reach out to them. Reach out to them.

[Music playing]
Complications

Suicidal thoughts and attempted suicide take an emotional toll. For instance, you may be so consumed by suicidal thoughts that you can't function in your daily life. And while many attempted suicides are impulsive acts during a moment of crisis, they can leave you with permanent serious or severe injuries, such as organ failure or brain damage.

For those left behind after a suicide — people known as survivors of suicide — grief, anger, depression and guilt are common.
Prevention

To help keep yourself from feeling suicidal:

    Get the treatment you need. If you don't treat the underlying cause, your suicidal thoughts are likely to return. You may feel embarrassed to seek treatment for mental health problems, but getting the right treatment for depression, substance misuse or another underlying problem will make you feel better about life — and help keep you safe.
    Establish your support network. It may be hard to talk about suicidal feelings, and your friends and family may not fully understand why you feel the way you do. Reach out anyway, and make sure the people who care about you know what's going on and are there when you need them. You may also want to get help from your place of worship, support groups or other community resources. Feeling connected and supported can help reduce suicide risk.
    Remember, suicidal feelings are temporary. If you feel hopeless or that life's not worth living anymore, remember that treatment can help you regain your perspective — and life will get better. Take one step at a time and don't act impulsively.


mayoclinic.org
Suicide and suicidal thoughts - Diagnosis and treatment
Print
11–14 minutes
Diagnosis

Your doctor may do a physical exam, tests and in-depth questioning about your mental and physical health to help determine what may be causing your suicidal thinking and to determine the best treatment.

Assessments may include:

    Mental health conditions. In most cases, suicidal thoughts are linked to an underlying mental health issue that can be treated. If this is the case, you may need to see a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental illness (psychiatrist) or other mental health provider.
    Physical health conditions. In some cases, suicidal thinking may be linked to an underlying physical health problem. You may need blood tests and other tests to determine whether this is the case.
    Alcohol and drug misuse. For many people, alcohol or drugs play a role in suicidal thinking and completed suicide. Your doctor will want to know whether you have any problems with alcohol or drug use — such as bingeing or being unable to cut back or quit using alcohol or drugs on your own. Many people who feel suicidal need treatment to help them stop using alcohol or drugs, to reduce their suicidal feelings.
    Medications. In some people, certain prescription or over-the-counter drugs can cause suicidal feelings. Tell your doctor about any medications you take to see whether they could be linked to your suicidal thinking.

Children and teenagers

Children who are feeling suicidal usually need to see a psychiatrist or psychologist experienced in diagnosing and treating children with mental health problems. In addition to patient discussion, the doctor will want to get an accurate picture of what's going on from a variety of sources, such as the parents or guardians, others close to the child or teen, school reports, and previous medical or psychiatric evaluations.
Treatment

Treatment of suicidal thoughts and behavior depends on your specific situation, including your level of suicide risk and what underlying problems may be causing your suicidal thoughts or behavior.
Emergencies

If you've attempted suicide and you're injured:

    Call 911 or your local emergency number.
    Have someone else call if you're not alone.

If you're not injured, but you're at immediate risk of harming yourself:

    Call 911 or your local emergency number.
    Call a suicide hotline number.
        In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, or chat using 988lifeline.org/chat/.
        U.S. Veterans or service members can call 988 and then press 1, or text 838255, or chat using veteranscrisisline.net/get-help-now/chat/.
        The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454.

At the emergency room, you'll be treated for any injuries. The doctor will ask you questions and may examine you, looking for recent or past signs of attempted suicide. Depending on your state of mind, you may need medications to calm you or to ease symptoms of an underlying mental illness, such as depression.

Your doctor may want you to stay in the hospital long enough to make sure any treatments are working, that you'll be safe when you leave and that you'll get the follow-up treatment you need.
Nonemergency situations

If you have suicidal thoughts, but aren't in a crisis situation, you may need outpatient treatment. This treatment may include:

    Psychotherapy. In psychotherapy, also called psychological counseling or talk therapy, you explore the issues that make you feel suicidal and learn skills to help manage emotions more effectively. You and your therapist can work together to develop a treatment plan and goals.
    Medications. Antidepressants, antipsychotic medications, anti-anxiety medications and other medications for mental illness can help reduce symptoms, which can help you feel less suicidal.
    Addiction treatment. Treatment for drug or alcohol addiction can include detoxification, addiction treatment programs and self-help group meetings.
    Family support and education. Your loved ones can be both a source of support and conflict. Involving them in treatment can help them understand what you're going through, give them better coping skills, and improve family communication and relationships.

Helping a loved one

If you have a loved one who has attempted suicide, or if you think your loved one may be in danger of doing so, get emergency help. Don't leave the person alone.

If you have a loved one you think may be considering suicide, have an open and honest discussion about your concerns. You may not be able to force someone to seek professional care, but you can offer encouragement and support. You can also help your loved one find a qualified doctor or mental health provider and make an appointment. You can even offer to go along.

Supporting a loved one who is chronically suicidal can be stressful and exhausting. You may be afraid and feel guilty and helpless. Take advantage of resources about suicide and suicide prevention so that you have information and tools to take action when needed. Also, take care of yourself by getting support from family, friends, organizations and professionals.
Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Lifestyle and home remedies

There's no substitute for professional help when it comes to treating suicidal thinking and preventing suicide. However, there are a few things that may reduce suicide risk:

    Avoid drugs and alcohol. Alcohol and recreational drugs can worsen suicidal thoughts. They can also make you feel less inhibited, which means you're more likely to act on your thoughts.
    Form a strong support network. That may include family, friends or members of your church, synagogue or other place of worship. Religious practice has been shown to help reduce the risk of suicide.
    Get active. Physical activity and exercise have been shown to reduce depression symptoms. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or taking up another form of physical activity that you enjoy.

Coping and support

Don't try to manage suicidal thoughts or behavior on your own. You need professional help and support to overcome the problems linked to suicidal thinking. In addition:

    Go to your appointments. Don't skip therapy sessions or doctor's appointments, even if you don't want to go or don't feel like you need to.
    Take medications as directed. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medications. If you stop, your suicidal feelings may come back. You could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms from abruptly stopping an antidepressant or other medication.
    Learn about your condition. Learning about your condition can empower and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan. If you have depression, for instance, learn about its causes and treatments.
    Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger your suicidal feelings. Learn to spot the danger signs early, and decide what steps to take ahead of time. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in how you feel. Consider involving family members or friends in watching for warning signs.
    Make a plan so you know what to do if suicidal thoughts return. You may want to make a written agreement with a mental health provider or a loved one to help you anticipate the right steps to take when you don't have the best judgment. Clearly stating your suicidal intention with your therapist makes it possible to anticipate it and address it.
    Eliminate potential means of killing yourself. If you think you might act on suicidal thoughts, immediately get rid of any potential means of killing yourself, such as firearms, knives or dangerous medications. If you take medications that have a potential for overdose, have a family member or friend give you your medications as prescribed.
    Seek help from a support group. A number of organizations are available to help you cope with suicidal thinking and recognize that there are many options in your life other than suicide.

Preparing for your appointment

When you call your primary care doctor to set up an appointment, you may be referred immediately to a psychiatrist. If you're in danger of killing yourself, your doctor may have you get emergency help at the hospital.
What you can do

Take these steps before your appointment:

    Make a list of key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes.
    Make a list of all medications, vitamins and other supplements that you're taking, and the doses. Be honest with your doctor about your alcohol and drug use.
    Ask a family member or friend to the appointment if possible — someone who accompanies you may remember something that you missed or forgot.
    Make a list of questions to ask your doctor.

Some basic questions to ask your doctor include:

    Could my suicidal thoughts be linked to an underlying mental or physical health problem?
    Will I need any tests for possible underlying conditions?
    Do I need immediate treatment of some kind? What will that involve?
    What are the alternatives to the approach that you're suggesting?
    I have these other mental or physical health problems. How can I best manage them together?
    Is there anything I can do to stay safe and feel better?
    Should I see a psychiatrist?
    Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing me?
    Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can have? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask additional questions.
What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions, such as:

    When did you first begin having suicidal thoughts?
    Have your suicidal thoughts been continuous or occasional?
    Have you ever tried to take your own life?
    Do you have a plan to kill yourself?
    If you have a plan, does it involve a specific method, place or time?
    Have you made any preparations, such as gathering pills or writing suicide notes?
    Do you feel like you can control your impulses when you feel like killing or hurting yourself?
    Do you have friends or family members you can talk to or go to for help?
    Do you drink alcohol, and if so, how much and how often?
    What medications do you take?
    Do you use recreational drugs?
    What, if anything, helps you deal with your suicidal thoughts?
    What, if anything, appears to worsen your suicidal thoughts?
    What are your feelings about the future? Do you have any hope that things will improve?

Preparing and anticipating questions will help you make the most of your time with the doctor.
What you can do in the meantime

If you've scheduled an appointment and can't see your doctor immediately, make sure you stay safe. Contact family members, friends or other people you trust to help you. If you feel you're in danger of hurting yourself or attempting suicide, call 911 or get emergency help immediately.
