

DEDICATION
To Minou and Dylan
for their persistent encouragement to
listen to my gut feelings.
To my mentor , John H. Walsh,
who kindled my interest in gut-brain communications.
CONTENTS
Dedication
Part 1
OUR BODY , THE INTELLIGENT  SUPERCOMPUTER
Chapter  1  The Mind-Body Connection Is Real
Chapter  2  How the Mind Communicates with the Gut
Chapter  3  How Your Gut Talks to Your Brain
Chapter  4  Microbe-Speak: A Key Component of the Gut-Brain Dialogue
Part 2
INTUITION AND GUT  FEELINGS
Chapter  5  Unhealthy Memories: The Effects of Early Life Experiences on
the Gut-Brain Dialogue
Chapter  6  A New Understanding of Emotions
Chapter  7  Understanding Intuitive Decision Making
Part 3
HOW  TO OPTIMIZE BRAIN–GUT  HEAL TH
Chapter  8  The Role of Food: Lessons from Hunter -Gatherers
Chapter  9  The Onslaught of the North American Diet: What Evolution
Did Not Foresee
Chapter  10  The Simple Road Toward Wellness and Optimal Health
Acknowledgments
Bibliography
Index
About the Author
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
PART 1
OUR BODY, THE INTELLIGENT
SUPERCOMPUTER
CHAPTER
1
THE MIND-BODY CONNECTION IS REAL
When I started medical school in 1970, doctors looked at the human body
as a complicated machine with a finite number of independent parts. On
average, it functioned for about seventy-five years, provided you took care
of it and fed it the right fuel. Like a high-quality car, it ran well, provided
that it didn’ t have any major accidents, and that no parts were irreversibly
compromised or broken. A few routine checkups during a lifetime were all
you were expected to do to prevent any unexpected calamities. Medicine
and surgery provided powerfu l tools to fix acute problem s, such as
infections, accidental injuries, or heart disease.
However , over the past forty to fifty years, something fundamental has
gone wrong with our health, and the old model no longer seems to be able
to provi de an explanation or a solution of how to fix the problems. What’ s
happening can no longer be easily explained simply by a single
malfunctioning organ or gene. Instead, we are beginning to realize that the
complex regulat ory mechanisms that help our bodies and brains adapt to
our rapidly changing enviro nment are in turn being impacted by our
changing lifestyles. These mech anisms do not operate independently , but as
parts of a whole. They regulate our food intake, metabolism  and body
weight, our immune system, and the development and health of our brains.
We are just beginning to realize that the gut, the microbes living in it—the
gut microbiota—and the signaling molecules that they produce  from their
vast number of genes—the microbiome—constitute one of the major
components of these regulatory systems.
In this book, I will offer a revolutionary new look at how the brain, the
gut, and the trillions of microor ganisms living in the gut communicate with
each other. In particular , I will focus on the role these connections play in
maintaining the health of our brain and our gut. I will discuss the negative
consequences on the health of these two organs when their cross talk is
disturbed, and propose ways of how to obtain optimal health by
reestablishing and optimizing brain-gut communications.
Even in medical school, the traditional, prevailing approach did not sit
quite right with me. Despite all the studying of organ systems and disease
mechanisms, I was surprised that there rarely was any mention of the brain
and its possible  involvement in such common diseases as stomach ulcers,
hypertension, or chronic pain. In addition, I had seen a number of patients
during rounds in the hospital for whom even the most thorough diagnostic
investigations failed to reveal a cause of their symptoms. These symptoms
mostly had to do with chronic pain experienced in different areas of the
body: in the belly , the pelvic area, and the chest. So, in my third year of
medical school, when it was time to begin my dissertation, I wanted to
study the biology of how the brain interacted with the body , in the hope that
I would develop  a better understanding of many of these common diseases.
Over a period of several months, I approached several professors from
different special ties. “Mr. Mayer ,” said Professor Karl, a senior internal
medicine profes sor at my unive rsity, “we all know that the psyche plays an
important role in chronic disease. But there is no scientific way today that
we can study this clinical phenomenon, and there is certainly no way that
you can write a whole dissertation on it.”
Professor Karl’ s disease model,  and that of the entire medical system,
worked extremely well for certain acute diseases—diseases that come on
suddenly , don’t last long, or both—in infections, heart attacks,  or surgical
emer gencies like an inflamed appendix. Based on these successes, modern
medicine had grown confident. There was hardly an infectious disease left
that couldn’ t be cured by ever-more-powerful antibiotics. Newly developed
surgical techniques could preve nt and cure many diseases. Broken parts
could be remove d or replaced. We only needed to figure out all the minute
engineering details that made the individual parts of this machine function.
Depending more and more on newly evolving technologies, our health care
system promoted a pervasive optimism that even the most deadl y of chronic
health problem s, including the scour ge of cancer , could be solved
eventually .
When President Richard Nixon signed into law the National Cancer Act
of 1971 , Western medicine acquired a new dimension and a new military
metaphor . Cance r became a national enemy , and the human body became a
battleground. On that battleg round, physicians took a scorched-earth
approach to rid the body of disease, using toxic chemicals, dead ly radiation,
and surgical interventions to attack cancer cells with increasing force.
Medicine was already using a similar strategy successfully to combat
infectious diseases, unleashing broad-spectrum antibiotics—antibiotics that
can kill or cripp le many species of bacteria—to wipe out disease-causing
bacteria. In both cases, as long as victory could be achieved, collateral
damage became an acceptable risk.
For decades, the mechanistic, militaristic disease model set the agenda
for medi cal research: As long as you could fix the affected machine part, we
thought, the problem would be solved; there was no need to understand its
ultimate cause. This philosophy led to high-blood-pressure treatments that
use beta blocker s and calcium antagonists to block aberrant signals from the
brain to the heart and blood vessels, and proton pump inhibitors that treat
gastric ulcers and heartburn by suppressing the stomach’ s excessive acid
production. Medicine and science never paid much attention to the
malfunction of the brain that was the primary cause of all these problems.
Sometimes the initial approach  failed, in which case even more intense
efforts were used as a last resor t. If the proton pump inhibitor didn’ t quell
the ulcer, you could always cut the entire vagus nerve, the essential bundle
of nerve fibers that connects brain and gut.
There is no question that some of these approaches have been
remarkably successful, and for years there did not seem to be any need for
the medical system and the pharmaceutical industry to change their
approach; nor was there much pressure on the patient to prevent the
development of the problem in the first place. In particular , there didn’ t
seem to be a need to consider the prominent role of the brain and the
distinct signals it sends to the body during stress or negative mind states.
The initial remedies for high blood pressure, heart disease, and gastric
ulcers were gradually replaced by far more effective treatment s that saved
lives, reduced suf fering, and made the pharmaceutical industry wealthy .
But today , the old mechanistic metaphors are beginning to yield. The
machines of forty years ago on which the traditional disease model was
based—the cars, ships, and airplanes—had none of the sophisticated
computers that play a central role in today’ s machines. Even  the Apollo
rockets going to the moon had only rudimentary computing devices on
board, millions of times less powerful than an iPhone and more comparable
to a Texas Instruments calculator from the 1980s! Not surprisingly , the
mechanistic disease models of the day did not include computin g power , or
intelligence. In other words, they did not consider the brain.
Paralleling the change in technology , the models we use to
conceptualize the human body have also changed. Computing power has
grown exponentially; cars have become mobile computers on wheels that
sense and regula te their parts to ensure proper function, and soon they will
drive without human input. Meanwhile, the old fascination with mechanics
and engines has given way to a new fascination with informatio n gathering
and processing. The machine model was useful in medicine for treating
some diseases. But when it comes to understanding chronic diseases of the
body and the brain, it’ s no longer serving us.
The Price Tag of the Machine Model
The traditional view of disease as a breakdown of individual parts of a
complex mechan ical device that can be fixed by medications or surgery has
spawned a continuously growing health care industry . Since 1970, the per
capita expense for health care in the United States has increas ed by more
than 2,000 percent. Nearly 20 percent of all goods produced by the U.S.
economy per year are required to pay for this enormous undertaking.
But while the World Health Organization, in a landmark  report
published in 2000, ranked the U.S. health care system as the highest in cost,
it ranked it a disappointing 37th in overall performance, and 72nd by
overall level of health among 191 member nations included in the study .
The United States didn’ t fare much better in a more recent report by the
Commonwealth Fund, which ranked the U.S. health care system as the most
expensive per capita among eleven Western countries, about two times
higher than all the other surveyed countries. At the same time, the United
States came in last in overall performance. This data reflects the hard fact
that despite the ever-increasing amount of resources spent on deali ng with
our nation’ s health problems, we have made little progress  in treating
chronic pain conditions, brain-gut disorders such as irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), or mental illnesses such as clinical depression, anxiety , or
neurodegenerative disorders. Are we failing because our models for
understanding the human body are outdated? There are a growing number
of integrative health experts, functional medicine practitioners, and even
traditional scien tists who would agree with this assumption. But change is
on the horizon.
The Mysterious Decline in Our Health
The failure to deal effectively  with many chronic diseases, including
irritable bowel syndrome, chronic pain, and depression, is not the only
shortcoming of the traditional, disease-based model of medicin e. Since the
1970s, we have also been witnessing new challenges to our health,
including the rapid rise of obesity and related metabolic disorders,
autoimmune disorders such as inflammatory bowel diseases, asthma, and
allergies, and diseases of the developing and the aging brain, such as
autism, Alzheimer ’s, and Parkinson’ s disease.
For example, the rate of obesity  in the United States has progressively
increased from 13 percent of the population in 1972 to 35 percent in 2012.
Today 154.7 million American adults are overweight or obese, including 17
percent of American children ages 2 to 19, or 1 in every 6 American
children. At least 2.8 million people each year die as a result of being
overweight or obese. Globally , 44 percent of diabetes, 23 percent of
ischemic heart disease, and 7-41 percent of certain cancers are attributable
to overw eight and obesity . If the obesity epidemic continues unabated, the
costs of treating people suffering  from obesity-related diseases are projected
to increase to a staggering $620 billion annually
We are still grappling for answers to explain the sudden rise of many of
these new health problems, and for most of them, we don’t yet have
effective solutions. While the increase in our longevity in the United States
has paralleled that of many other countries in the developed world, we are
far behind in terms of physical and mental well-being when we reach the
last decades of our lives. The price we pay for an increase in the quantity of
years we live is a decrease in the quality of those years.
In view of these challenges, it’s time to update our prevailing model of
the human body to understand how it really works, how to keep it running
optimally , and how to fix it safely and effectively when something goes
wrong. We can no longer tolerate the price tag and the long-ter m collateral
damage that our outdated model has produced.
Until now, we have largely ignored the critical role of two of the most
complex and crucial systems in our bodies when it comes to maintaining
our overall health: the gut (the digestive system) and the brain (the nervous
system). The mind-body connection is far from a myth; it is a biological
fact, and an essential link to understand when it comes to our whole body
health.
The Supercomputer View of Our Digestive System
For decades, our understanding of the digestive system was based on the
machine model of the entire body . It viewed the gut mostly as an old-
fashioned device that functioned according to principles of the nineteenth-
century steam engine. We ate, chewed and swallowed our food, then our
stomach broke it down with mechanical grinding forces assis ted by
concentrated hydrochloric acid before dumping the homogenized food paste
into the small intestine, which absorbed calories and nutrients and sent the
undigested food into the large intestine, which disposed of what remained
by excreting it. This industrial-age metaphor was easy to grasp, and it
influenced gener ations of doctors, including today’ s gastroenterologists and
surgeons. According to this view , the digestive tract’ s malfunctioning parts
can easily be bypassed or removed, and it can be dramatically rewired to
promote weight loss. We have become so skilled in doing these
interventions that they can even be performed through an endoscope
without sur gery.
But as it turns out, this model is overly simplistic. While medicine
continues to view the digestive system as being largely indepe ndent of the
brain, we now know that these  two organs are intricately connected with
each other, an insight reflected in the concept of a gut-brain axis. Based on
this concept, our digestive system is much more delicate, complex, and
powerful than we once assumed. Recent studies suggest that in close
interactions with its resident microbes, the gut can influence our basic
emotions, our pain sensitivity , and our social interactions, and even guide
many of our decisions—and not just those about our food preferences and
meal sizes. Validating the popular expression of “gut-based” decision
making in neurobiological terms, the complex communication between the
gut and the brain plays a role when we make some of our most important
life decisions.
The connection between our gut and our mind is not something that
solely psycholog ists should be interested in; it is not just in our heads. The
connection is hardwired in the form of anatomical connections between the
brain and the gut, and facilitated by biological communication signals
carried throughout the bloodstream. But before we get too far, let’s take a
step back and take a closer look at just what I mean by the “gut”—your
digestive system, which is far more comp lex than a simple food processing
machine.
Your gut has capabilities that surpass all your other organs and even
rival your brain. It has its own nervous system, known in scientific
literature as the enteric nervous system, or ENS, and often referred to in the
media as the “second brain.” This second brain is made up of 50-100
million nerve cells, as many as are contained in your spinal cord.
The immune cells residing in your gut make up the largest component
of your body’ s immune system ; in other words, there are more immune
cells living in the wall of your gut than circulating in the blood  or residing
in your bone marrow . And there  is a good reason for the mass ing of these
cells in this particular location, which is exposed to many potentially lethal
microor ganisms contained in what we eat. The gut-based immune defense
system is capable of identifying and destroying a single species of
dangerous bacte rial invaders that makes it into our digestive system when
we accidentally ingest contam inated food or water . What is even more
remarkable, it accomplishes this task by recognizing the smal l number of
potentially lethal bacteria in an ocean of a trillion other benevolent
microbes living in your gut, the gut microbiota. Accomplishing this
challenging task ensures that we can live with our gut microbiota in perfect
harmony .
The lining of your gut is studded  with a huge number of endocrine cells,
specialized cells that contain up to twenty different types of hormones that
can be released into the bloodstream if called upon. If you could clump all
these endocrine cells together into one mass, it would be greater than all
your other endocrine organs—your gonads, thyroid gland, pituitary gland,
and adrenal glands—combined.
The gut is also the largest storage facility for serotonin in our body .
Ninety-five percent of the body’ s serotonin is stored in these warehouses.
Serotonin is a signaling molecule that plays a crucial role within the gut-
brain axis: It is not only essential for normal intestinal functions , such as the
coordinated contractions that move food through our digestive system, but
it also plays a crucial role in such vital functions as sleep, appetite, pain
sensitivity , mood, and overall well-being. Because of the widespread
involvement in regulation of some of these brain systems, this signaling
molecule is the main target of the major class of antidepr essants, the
serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
If our gut’s sole function was to manage digestion, why would it contain
this unparalleled assembly of specialized cells and signaling systems? One
answer to this question is a largely unknown feature of our gut, its crucial
function as a vast sensory organ, covering the largest surface of our bodies.
When spread out, the gut has the size of a basketball court, and it is packed
with thousands of little sensors that encode the vast amount of information
that is containe d in your food in the form of signaling molecules, from
sweet to bitter , from hot to cold, and from spicy to soothing.
The gut is connected to the brain through thick nerve cables that can
transfer inform ation in both directions and through communication
channels that use the bloodstream: hormones and inflammatory signaling
molecules produ ced by the gut signaling up to the brain, and hormones
produced by the brain signaling down to the various cells in the gut, such as
the smooth muscle, the nerves, and the immune cells, changing their
functions. Many  of the gut signals reaching the brain will not only generate
gut sensations, such as the fullness after a nice meal, nausea and discomfort,
and feelings of well-being, but will also trigger responses of the brain that it
sends back to the gut, genera ting distinct gut reactions. And the brain
doesn’ t forget about these feelings, either . Gut feelings are stored in vast
databases in the brain, which can later be accessed when making decisions.
What we sense in our gut will ultimately affect not only the decisions we
make about what to eat and drink, but also the people we choose to spend
time with and the way we assess critical information as workers, jury
members, and leaders.
FIG. 1. BIDIRECTIONAL  COMMUNICA TIONS BETWEEN THE GUT  AND THE
BRAIN
The gut and the brain are closely linked through bidir ectional signaling pathways that include
nerves, hormones, and inflammatory molecules. Rich sensory information generated in the gut
reaches the brain (gut sensations), and the brain sends signals back to the gut to adjust its
function (gut reactions). The close interactions of these pathways play a crucial role in the
generation of emotions and in optimal gut function. The two ar e intricately linked.
In Chinese philosophy , the concept of yin and yang describ es how
opposite or contrary forces can be viewed as complem entary and
interconnected, and how they give rise to a unifying whole by interacting
with each other . When applied to the brain-gut axis, we can view our gut
feelings  as the yin, and gut reactions  as the yang. Just as yin and yang are
the two complementary principles of the same entity—the brain-gut
connection—both the feelings and the reactions are different aspects of the
same bidirectional brain-gut network that plays such a crucial  role in our
well-being, our emotions, and our ability to make intuitive decisions.
The Dawn of the Gut Microbiome
While few people paid much attention to the findings of investigators
studying brain-gut interactions over the past several decades, in recent
years, the gut-b rain axis has taken center stage. This shift can be largely
attributed to the exponential rise in knowledge and data about the bacteria,
archaea, fungi, and viruses that live inside the gut, which are collectively
called the gut microbiota. Even though we are outnumbered by these
invisible microor ganisms (there are 100,000 times more micro bes in your
gut alone as there are people on earth), humans only became aware of their
existence some three hundred years ago, when Dutch scientist Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek made critical improvements to the microscope. When he
peered through, he was able to observe live microor ganisms from scrapings
of the teeth, which he gave the name “animalcules.”
Dramatic technological changes in our ability to identify and
characterize these microor ganisms has occurred since then, and most of this
progress has occurred during the past decade. The Human Microbiome
Project played a major role in this remarkable progress. The project is an
initiative of the U.S. National Institutes of Health launched in October 2007
with the goal of identifying and characterizing the microor ganisms living in
coexistence with us humans. It was designed to understand the microbial
components of our genetic and metabolic landscape, and how they
contribute to our normal physiology and disease predisposition.
Over the past decade, the topic of the gut microbiome has spread into
virtually every specialty of medicine, even into such widely different
specialties as psychiatry and surgery. Invisible communities of microbes are
everywhere in our world, including in plants, animals, soils, deep-sea vents,
and the upper atmosphere, and as such the fascination with the world of
microor ganisms also extends to scientists studying microbes inhabiting our
oceans, soil, and forests. Even  the White House has gotten involved by
convening scientists from across the country in 2015 to explo re how
microbes influence the earth’ s climate, its food supply , and human health.
As of this writi ng, President Barack Obama plans to announc e a national
Microbiome Initiative on May 13, 2016, analogous to the earlier Brain
Initiative of 2014, which has resulted in billions of dollars of investments
into studies of the human brain.
The benefits derived by us huma ns from our microbiotas have profound
consequences for health. Some of the best-documented benefits include
assistance in the digestion of food components our guts can’t handle by
themselves, regulation of our bodies’  metabolism, processing and
detoxification of dangerous chem icals that we ingest with our food, training
and regulation of the immune system, and prevention of invasion and
growth of dangerous pathoge ns. On the other hand, disturbance and
alterations in the gut microbiome—gut microbiota and their collective
genes and genomes—are associated with a wide variety of diseases, such as
inflammatory bowel disease, antibiotic-associated diarrhea, and asthma, and
they may even play a role in autism spectrum disorders and
neurodegenerative brain disorders like Parkinson’ s disease.
FIG. 2. GUT  MICROBIAL  DIVERSITY  AND VULNERABILITY  FOR BRAIN
DISORDERS
The diversity and abundance of gut microbes vary over the lifetime of an individual. It is low
during the first three years of life when a stable gut microbiome is being established, reaches its
maximum during adult life, and decreases  as we grow older . The early period of low diversity
coincides with the vulnerability window for neurodevelopmental disor ders such as autism and
anxiety , while the late period of low diversity coincides with the devel opment of
neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’ s and Alzheimer ’s disease. One may speculate
that these low diversity states ar e risk factors for developing such diseases.
With the help of new technologies, we’re discovering and charac terizing
distinct microbi al populations from our skin, face, nostrils, mouth, lips,
eyelids, and even between our teeth. The gastrointestinal tract, in particular
the large intestine, however , is home to by far the largest popula tions. More
than 100 trillion microbes live in the dark and nearly oxygen-free world of
the human gut—about the same number of all the human cells in the body ,
if you include the human red blood cells in this comparison. This means
that only 10 percent of the cells in or on a human being are actually human.
(If you include the body’ s red blood cells, this number may be closer to 50
percent). If you put all your gut microbes together and shaped them into an
organ, it would weigh between 2 and 6 pounds—on par with the brain,
which weighs in at 2.6 pounds. Based on this comparison, some people
have referred to the gut micro biota as a “forgotten organ.” The 1,000
bacterial specie s that make up the gut microbiota contain more than 7
million genes— or up to 360 bacterial genes for every human  gene. This
means that less than 1 percent of the combined human and microbial genes
(the so-called hologenome) are actu ally of human origin!
All these genes give the micro bes not only an enormous capacity for
generating molecules through which they can communicate with us, but
also an impressi ve ability for variation. Gut microbiota differ quite widely
from person to person, and no two people’ s gut microbiota are exactly alike
in terms  of the many strains and species of microbes they contain. The
microbes presen t in your gut depend on many factors, including  your genes,
your mother ’s microbiota, which all of us take on to some  extent, the
microbes that other members of your household carry , your diet, and—as
we will discuss in this book—your brain’ s activity and state of mind.
To fully grasp the tremendous  importance that microbes play in our
bodies, it is worth remembering  where they came from and how they linked
up with us humans. This evolutionary tale has been put into a wonderful
narrative by Martin Blaser in his book Missing Micr obes:
For abou t 3 billion years, bacteria were the sole living inhabitants on
Earth. They occupied every tranche of land, air and water , driving
chemical reactions setting the conditions for the evolution of
multicellular life. Slowly , throug h trial and error across the vastness
of time, they invented the complex and robust feedback systems,
including the most efficient “language” that to this day support s all
life on Earth.
Everything that we’ve learned about the gut microbiota challenges
traditional scientific beliefs, which is one reason why it has become the
topic of so much interest and controversy , both in the world of science and
the media. It is also the reason why some people are posing deeper , more
philosophical questions about the impact of the microbiome: Are our human
bodies just a vehicle for the microbes living in it? Do the microbes
manipulate our brains to make us seek out foods that are best for them ?
Should the fact that we humans are outnumbered by nonhuman cells change
our concept of the human self?
Such philosophical speculations are fascinating, but they are not
currently supported by science . However , the implications of what the
science of the human microbiome has revealed so far in the last decade are
equally profound. And even though we are just at the very begin ning of this
rapidly unfolding journey of scientific discovery , we can no longer view
ourselves as the only intelligent  product of evolution, distinct from all the
other living creatures on the planet. Just as the Copernican Revolution in
the sixteenth century fundamentally changed our understanding of the
world’ s position in the solar system, and Darwin’ s revolutionary theory of
evolution propo sed in the nineteenth century has forever changed our
position within the animal kingdom, the human microbiome science is
forcing us again to reevaluate our position on earth. According  to the new
science of the microbiome, we humans are truly supraor ganisms, composed
of closely interconnected human and microbial components, which are
inseparable and dependent on each other for survival. And most concerning
is the fact that the microbial components are vastly greater than our human
contribution to this supraor ganism. As the microbial component is so
closely connecte d through a shared biological communication system to all
the other microbiomes in the soil, the air, the oceans, and the microbes
living in symbiosis with almost all other living creatures, we are closely and
inextricably tied into the earth’ s web of life. The new concept of the human
microbial supraor ganism clearly has profound implication s for our
understanding of our role on earth and for many aspects of health and
disease.
When the Gut-Microbiota-Brain Axis Falls Out of
Balance
The health of any ecosystem can be expressed as its stability and resilience
against insults and perturbations . Major factors that contribute to this health
are the diversity  and abundance of organisms making up the ecosystem. The
same considerations apply to our gut microbiome ecosystem . There is
growing evidence that the mix of gut microbes falls out of its healthy stable
state in several gut disorders (a state called dysbiosis). One of the most
serious and best-characterized states of dysbiosis has been reported in a
small number of antibiotic-treated hospital patients, who develop severe
diarrhea and gut inflammation following the treatment with antibiotics. This
so-called Clostridium difficile  colitis develops when a broad-spectrum
antibiotic treatm ent greatly diminishes the diversity and abundance of the
normal gut microbiota, allowing  the invasion by the pathogen  C. difficile.
Further confirming the importance of gut microbial diversity for gut health
is the observation that the colon inflammation can be rapidly cured by
reestablishing the compromised architecture of the gut microbiome. The
only currently available way to restore gut microbial diversity in these
patients is the transfer of an intact microbiota from the feces of a healthy
donor into the gut of the affected patient. This treatment, so-called fecal
microbial transplantation, results in an almost miraculous reconstitution of
the patient’ s own microbial composition. We will learn more about this new
type of treatment later in this book.
However , the extent and precise role of the dysbiotic state in the
pathophysiology of other chron ic gut disorders, such as ulcera tive colitis,
Crohn’ s disease, or the brain-gut disorder irritable bowel syndrome (IBS),
are less completely understood, and many questions remain. Up to 15
percent of the population worldwide suffers from the cardinal IBS
symptoms, altered bowel habits, and abdominal pain and discomfort.
Several studies have reported altered gut microbial communities in a subset
of patients, but it’s not clear yet which of the available therapies that aim to
restore balance to these gut microbiota (including antibiotics, probiotics, a
special diet, or fecal microbial transplantation) work best in individual
patients.
The Emerging Role of Microbes
Just a few years ago, it would have sounded like science fictio n. But new
science confirms  that our brains,  guts, and gut microbes talk to each other in
a shared biological language. How can these invisible creatures talk to us?
How can we hear them, and how can they possibly communicate with us?
The microbes not only inhabit the inside of your gut; many of them sit
on a razor -thin layer of mucus and cells that coats the inner lining of your
intestine. In this unique habitat they are barely separated from the gut’s
immune cells and the numero us cellular sensors that encode our gut
sensations. In other words, they live in intimate contact with the major
information-gathering systems in our body . This location allows them to
listen in as the brain signals the gut how stressed you are, or when you feel
happy , anxious, or angry , even if you are not fully aware of these emotional
states. But they do more than just listen. As incredible as this may sound,
your gut microb es are in a prime position to influence your emotions, by
generating and modulating signals the gut sends back to the brain. Thus,
what starts as an emotion in the brain influences your gut and the signals
generated by your microbes, and these signals in turn communicate back to
the brain, reinforcing and sometimes even prolonging the emotional state.
When the first publications on this topic—mostly animal studies—
appeared in the scientific literat ure some ten years ago, I was skeptical of
the results and implications, which just seemed to be too far outside of the
conventional view of medicine. However , after my research group at the
University of California, Los Angeles, under the leadership of Kirsten
Tillisch completed our own study in healthy human subjects, we were able
to confirm the results of the animal studies—and I became determined to
further explore the question of whether the interactions between the gut
microbiota and the brain could affect our background emotions, social
interactions, and even our ability to make decisions. Is the proper balance of
microbes a prerequisite for mental health? And when these connections
between the mind and gut are altered, can they raise a person’ s risk of
developing chronic diseases of the brain? These questions are fascinating
not only from a scientist’ s persp ective, but also from a human one: a better
understanding of the gut-brain connection is urgently needed in view of the
impact that many brain disorders have on human suffering and health care
costs.
There has been a dramatic, continuous increase in the reported
prevalence of autism spectrum disorders, from 4.5 in 10,000  children in
1966 to 1 in 68 children aged 8 years in 2010. The most recent data from
the 2014 National Health Interv iew reveals that as many as 2.2 percent of
U.S. children have received a diagnosis of ASD at some point in their lives,
suggesting the current prevalenc e to be 1 in 58 U.S. children. Some of this
increase is likely due to greater awareness and changes in diagnostic
criteria, but the evidence also suggests that autism spectrum disorders have
become at least twice as prevalent in the last decade alone.
As autis m spectrum disorders rose, so did other diseases linked to a
change in our gut microbiota, including autoimmune and metabolic
disorders. The similarities in the time course of these new epidemics
suggested a common underlying  mechanism related to a change in our gut
microbiota during the last fifty years. Changes in our lifestyles, diet, and in
the widespread use of antibiotic s have been implicated as possible causes.
Recent animal studies have bolstered the link. And recent clinical trials with
specific probioti cs and with fecal microbial transplantation have begun to
directly test the link between gut microbiota and behavioral abnormalities.
Neurodegenerative disorders are on the rise as well. In industrialized
countries, one in 100 people over 60 have Parkinson’ s disease , and in the
United States, the disease affects at least half a million people, with about
50,000 new cases diagnosed each year. While it has been estimated that the
number of Parkinson’ s cases will double by 2030, the true prevalence of the
disease is difficult to assess, because the disease is typically not diagnosed
by its classical neurological signs and symptoms until the diseas e process is
already far advanced. In fact, recent research shows that the enteric nervous
system undergoes the nerve degeneration typical of Parkinson’ s long before
classical sympto ms of the disea se appear , and that changes in patients’  gut
microbial composition accompany the disease.
Meanwhile, as many as 5 million Americans were living with
Alzheimer ’s disease in 2013, and by 2050, this number is projected to rise
nearly threefold to 14 million. Similar to the typical age of onset of
Parkinson’ s, the symptoms of Alzheimer ’s disease first appear after age 60
and the risk increases with age. The number of people with the disease
doubles every 5 years beyond age 65. The economic cost of Alzheimer ’s is
already enormous, and, if present trends continue, it’s expected to grow
rapidly to $1.1 trillion per year by 2050. Could lifelong alterations in gut
microbial functi on play a role in both of these neurodegenerativ e disorders,
which af fect humans at roughly the same age?
Gut microbiota have also been linked to depression, which is the second
leading cause of disability in the United States. The drugs used most often
to treat depression are the so-ca lled selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
such as Prozac,  Paxil, and Celexa. These drugs boost the activity of the
serotonin signaling system, which psychiatry had long thought is
exclusively located in the brain. However , we know today that 95 percent of
the body’s serotonin is actually contained in specialized cells in the gut, and
these serotonin-containing cells are influenced by what we eat, by
chemicals releas ed from certain species of gut microbes, and by signals that
the brain sends to them, informing them about our emotional state. What is
most remarkable is that these cells are tightly connected to sensory nerves
that signal directly back into the brain’ s emotion regulating centers, making
them an important hub within the gut-brain axis. Because of this strategic
location it is likely that gut microbes and their metabolit es play an
important and largely unrecognized role in the development of depression
as well as its severity and length—an intriguing possibil ity that, if
confirmed in controlled studies, could create new opportuni ties for the
development of more effectiv e treatments, including specific dietary
interventions.
In this book, we will look at new evidence that is beginning to link
some of the most devastating brain diseases and some of the most common
brain-gut disorders to alteration s in how the gut microbes communicate
with the brain, and how our lifestyle and diet may impact this connection.
You Are What You Eat—as Long as You Count Your
Gut Microbes
“Tell me what you eat, and I will tell you who you are,” wrote Jean
Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, a French lawyer , physician, and author of an
influential nineteenth-century book on the physiology of taste. This
connoisseur of high cuisine, for whom Savarin cheese and the Gateau
Savarin pastry are named, offered some profound early insights into the
relationship between diet, obesi ty, and indigestion. But back in 1826, when
he wrote this, he could not have known that gut microbes mediate how food
affects mental well-being and important brain functions. In fact, the gut
microbiota resid ing at the interfa ce between our gut and our nervous system
are in a key position to link our physical and mental well-being directly to
what we eat and drink, and in turn link our feelings and emotions to the
processing of our food.
Your gut gathers information about your food and your environment
every millisecond, and it does this twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
week, even as you sleep. Much of this information gathering occurs in the
stomach and the beginning of the small intestine, where only a small
number of microbes reside, and where their contribution to the gut-brain
dialogue is likely to be small. But the trillions of microbes living in your
large intestine digest remaining  food components to produce vast numbers
of molecules that add a whole new dimension to this process. As we know
from animal experiments, an absence of gut microbes is compatible with
life, including the digestion and absorption of nutrients, that is, as long as
you live in an environment free of pathogens. However , we now know that
such germ-free animals—mice , rats, and even horses—have significant
alterations in the development of their brains, in particular in brain regions
involved in emotion regulati on. Growing up in such a germ-free
environment takes a serious toll on the development of your brain.
The well-being of your gut microbes depends on the food you eat, and
they are more or less programmed in their food preferences during the first
few years in life. However , regardless of their original programming, they
can digest virtually everything you feed them, regardless of whether you’re
an omni vore or a pescatarian. No matter what you feed them, they will use
their enormous amount of infor mation stored in their millions of genes to
transform partially digested food into hundreds of thousands of metabolites.
Even though we are only at the beginning of our understanding what effects
these metabolites have on our body, we know that some of them profoundly
affect the GI tract, including its nerves and immune cells. Others find their
way into the bloodstream and are involved in long-distance signaling,
influencing every organ, including the brain. A particularly important role
of such microbe-produced molecules is their ability to induce a state of low-
grade inflammation in their target organs, which has been implicated in
obesity , heart disease, chronic pain, and degenerative diseases of the brain.
These inflamma tory molecules and their effect on certain brain regions may
well be a major clue to our understanding of many human brain disorders.
What Does This New Science Mean for Your Health?
There is no question that the emer ging science of gut-brain communication
has been one of the most fascin ating topics for scientists and the media for
the last few years. Who would have ever believed that simply transferring
fecal pellets containing gut microbiota from an “extrovert” mouse could
change the behavior of a “timid” mouse, making it behave more like the
gregarious dono r mouse? Or that doing a similar experiment transplanting
stool and its microbes from an obese mouse with a voracious appetite
would turn a lean mouse into the same overeating animal? Or that the
ingestion of a probiotic-enriched yogurt for four weeks in healthy human
females could reduce their brains’  response to negative emotional stimuli?
The emer ging knowledge of an integrated gut microbiota-brain system
and its intimate relationship with the food we eat is revealing how the mind,
brain, gut, and the gut’s microbiota interact. These interactions can either
make us vulnerable to a growin g number of diseases, or they can help to
ensure a state of optimal health . But even more revolutionary , we’re now
forging a new understanding of disease, health, and mental well-being,
which is based on an ecologi cal view of our bodies, emphasizing the
interconnectedness of myriads of players in the gut and in the brain,
creating stability and resistance against disease.
This new understanding will require us to demand more from our health
care system. We’ll need it to move away from dominant yet outmoded ideas
of the body as a complex machine with separate parts, and toward the idea
of a highly interconnected ecological system that creates stability and
resilience against disturbances through its diversity . As stated by a famous
microbiome scientist, we’ll also need it to stop declaring war on individual
cells or microbes and start regarding our gut microbiome as the friendly
park ranger that helps to main tain biodiversity in a complex ecosystem.
This paradigm shift is essential to keep our gut, and therefore our whole
selves, healthy and resilient against disease. This new understanding is
likely to reveal new paths to treat and prevent common diseases that afflict
millions of Americans.
The time has come to empower ourselves to become the engineers of
our own internal ecosystem, and our bodies and minds. To become your
own ecosystem engineer , you will first need to understand how your brain
communicates with your gut, how your gut communicates with your brain,
and how your gut microbes influence both of these interactions. In the
pages that follow , we will look at the latest scientific findings about these
communication systems. If I’m successful, by the end of the book you’ll be
looking at yourself and the world around you in an entirely new way .
CHAPTER
2
HOW THE MIND COMMUNICATES WITH THE
GUT
Imagine you’re on the freeway , and the driver who’ s been tailgating you
suddenly zips into traffic, swerves abruptly in front of you, and then slams
on his brakes. You brake hard to avoid hitting him, causing you to swerve to
the next lane. Then you see him laugh. Your neck muscles begin  to tense up,
your jaw clenches, your lips tighten, your brow furrows. From the
passenger seat, your spouse immediately notices your angry expression. In
contrast, remem ber a time when you were depressed. Your face sank, your
gaze lowered, and people around you noticed.
Recognizing emotions on other people’ s faces comes naturall y to us.
This skill transcends the barriers of language, race, culture, national origin,
and even species, as we can recognize an angry dog or a frightened cat.
Nature programmed humans to recognize various emotions easily and
gauge our responses accordingly . Your emotions are so apparent because
your brain sends out a distinct pattern of signals to the face’ s many small
muscles, which  means that every emotion has a corresponding facial
expression. The people around you can discern your facial expressions in
the blink of an eye. Each of us is an open book.
But we are literally blind to the gut manifestations of these emotions.
When you are fuming in traffic, your brain sends out a characteristic pattern
of signals to your digestive system, just as it does to your facial muscles;
the digestive system also respo nds dramatically . As you sat fuming about
the driver who cut you off, your stomach went into vigorous contractions,
which increased its production  of acid and slowed the emptying of the
scrambled eggs you ate for breakfast. Meanwhile your intestines twisted
and spit mucus and other digestive juices . A similar yet distinct pattern
happens when you’re anxious  or upset. When you’re depressed, your
intestines hardly move at all. In fact, we now know that your gut mirrors
every emotion that arises in your brain.
FIG. 3. THE GUT  IS A MIRROR IMAGE OF  EMOTIONAL  FACIAL  EXPRESSIONS
Emotions are closely reflected in a person’ s facial expressions. A similar expression of our
emotions occurs in the differ ent regions of the gastr ointestinal tract, which is influenced by
nerve signals generated in the limbic system. Signals to the upper and lower GI tract can be
synchr onous or go in opposite directions. Solid white arrows indicate the increase or decrease
in gastr ointestinal contractions associated with a particular emotion.
The activity of these brain circuits affects other organs as well, creating
a coordinated response to every emotion you feel. When you’re stressed, for
example, your heartbeat speed s and your neck and shoulder muscles
tighten, and the reverse happens  when you’re relaxed. But the brain is tied
to the gut like no other organ, with far more extensive, hardwired
connections . Because people  have always felt emotion in their gut, our
language is rich with expressions that reflect this. Every time your stomach
was tied up in knots, you had a gut-wrenching experience, or you felt
butterflies in your stomach, it was the emotion-generating circuits of your
brain that were responsible. Your emotions, brain, and gut are uniquely
connected.
If a patient with abnormal gut reactions seeks help from the medical
system and an endoscopy does not reveal something more serio us, such as
gut inflammation or a tumor , physicians often dismiss the importance of the
patient’ s symptoms. Frustrated about their inability to provide effective
relief, they tend to recomme nd special diets, probiotics, or pills to
normalize abnormal bowel habits, without addressing the true cause of the
gut reaction.
If more doctors and patients realized that the gut is in fact a theater in
which the drama of emotion plays out, that drama might be less likely to
become a painful melodrama for patients. Nearly 15 percent of the U.S.
population suffers from a range of aberrant gut reactions, includ ing irritable
bowel syndrome, chronic consti pation, indigestion, and functional
heartburn, which all fall into the category of brain-gut disorders. They
suffer from symptoms that range  from queasiness, gurgling, and bloating all
the way to unbe arable pain. Amazingly , the majority of patients suffering
from abnormal gut reactions have no idea that their gut problems reflect
their emotional state.
Even more amazingly , most of the time neither do their doctors.
The Man Who Could Not Stop Vomiting
Of the many patients I have seen in my long career as a gastroenterologist,
Bill stands out in my memory more than any other . Bill was twenty-five and
otherwise healthy when he came to my office with his fifty-two-year -old
mother . Surprisingly , it was she who started the conversation: “I really hope
you can help Bill. You are our last resort. We are desperate.”
Over the previou s eight years, Bill had spent countless hours in various
emer gency rooms, suffering from excruciating stomach pain and
unstoppable vomiting. During particularly difficult periods, he would visit
the ER several  times a week . Usually the ER physicians prescribed
painkillers and sedatives to treat his discomfort, but none of them seemed to
have any idea what was actually wrong with him. Even worse, some labeled
him a drug-seeking patient because nothing in the diagnostic tests they ran
matched the severity of his symptoms.
Bill had also been to several gastrointestinal (GI) specialists who
performed exten sive diagnostic tests but without finding a cause for his
miserable symptoms. His contin ued pain and vomiting forced him to drop
out of college and move back in with his concerned parents.
His mother , a businesswoman, was frustrated that Bill’s doctors  had not
been able to diagnose Bill accurately , so she began searching  online for
answers. “I think he has all the symptoms of cyclical vomiting syndrome,”
she told me.
As Bill’ s doctor , I wanted to see for myself.
As happ ens often with brain-gut disorders, many unusual theories have
been proposed to explain the unique constellation of symptoms  in cyclical
vomiting syndrome. But based on decades of research that my team has
done with sever al other research groups at UCLA, I believed that the most
plausible explan ation was an exaggerated gut reaction triggered by an
overactive stress response in the brain.
In patients with cyclical vomiting syndrome, stressful life events
generally spark the attacks. A wide range of seemingly unrelated stimuli
including strenuous exercise, menstruation, exposure to high altitudes, or
simple prolonged psychological stress can cause enough of an imbalance in
the body to trigger an attack. When the brain (not necessarily our conscious
brain) perceives such a threat, it signals the hypothalamus, an important
brain region coordinating all our vital functions, to crank up release of a
critical stress molecule called corticotropin-releasing factor , or CRF for
short, which functions as a master switch that sends the brain (and the
body) into stress-response mode. Patients with this disorder may be
completely symptom-free for several months or even years, even though
their CRF system is primed all the time. But when they experience
additional stress, a recurrence of symptoms is triggered.
When CRF levels rise high enough, it switches every organ and cell in
your body , including the gut, into stress mode. In a series of elegant animal
experiments, my UCLA  colleag ue Yvette Tache, who’ s one of the world’ s
experts in stress-induced brain-g ut interactions, revealed the many shifts in
the body that CRF induces.
FIG. 4. GUT  REACTIONS IN RESPONSE TO STRESS
In response to any perturbations of an individual’ s normal balanced state such as stress, the
brain mounts a coordinated response aimed at optimizing the organism’ s well-being and
survival. The corticotr opin releasing factor (CRF) is the chemical master switch that sets this
stress response in motion. It is secreted by the hypothalamus and acts on closely adjacent
regions of the brain. Stress-induced CRF in the brain is associated with an increase in stress
hormones (such as cortisol and norepine phrine) in the body . This process also stimulates a
stress-induced gut r eaction that impacts the composition and activity of the gut micr obiota.
In the brain, spiking CRF levels raise anxiety and make people more
sensitive to a range of sensations, including signals from the gut, which are
experienced as severe belly pain. The gut itself contracts more and its
contents are evacuated, resulting in diarrhea. The stomach slows down and
even reverses itself to empty its contents upward. The gut wall becomes
leakier , the colon secretes more water and mucus, and the amount of blood
flowing through the lining of our stomach and intestine increases.
In Bill’s case, just a few key questions about his symptoms would help
me make a diagnosis. I asked Bill if he was completely symp tom-free in
between his bouts of vomiting, which was the case. I asked him and his
mother whether there was a family history of migraine headaches, a chronic
pain disorder genetically related to cyclical vomiting syndrome. And
indeed, both his mother and grandmother suf fered from migraines.
“What kind of symptoms do you experience in the period immediately
before an attack ?” I asked. Bill told me that a full-blown attack was usually
preceded by about fifteen minutes of intense anxiety , sweating, cold hands,
and pounding of his heart—all  symptoms of a stresslike reaction in his
body . What’ s more, these symptoms woke him up very early in the morning
—another identifying feature of the syndrome. (This feature is probably
caused by the diurnal increase in the activity of our central stress system.) A
hot shower or an Ativan pill could prevent the attacks, but most of the time
that didn’ t help. “Once the vomiting begins, and I can’t stop it, I have to
rush to the emer gency room.”
“What happens in the emer gency room?” I asked. Bill told me that his
doctors reluctan tly gave him narcotic painkillers, which usually put him
right to sleep, and he’d wake up symptom-free an hour later. Bill’s many
previous diagnostic tests, includ ing endoscopies and CT scans of his belly ,
had not revealed any abnormali ties that could explain his symp toms, and a
brain scan had ruled out a brain tumor .
Bill’s mother ’s Internet diagnosis was indeed correct—he was suffering
from cyclical vomiting syndro me. The sad thing was that despi te his
doctors’  repeate d failure to diagnose him correctly , making the correct
diagnosis was actually simple, and his mother , who had no medical training,
did it on the Internet.
You don’t have to suffer from  the crippling symptoms of cyclical
vomiting syndrome to experience the limited knowledge that many
physicians have about gut reactions gone wrong, and the resul ting lack of
effective therapi es. Nearly 3 in 20 people in the United States suffer from
symptoms or syndromes caused by problems from altered brain-gut
interactions, including irritable bowel syndrome, functional heartburn, or
functional dyspepsia. However , those of you who are not bothered by nasty
and unpleasant gut sensations should be aware that you don’t have to have
any of these disorders for gut reactions to occur .
Cyclical vomitin g syndrome is one of the most dramatic exam ples of
gut reactions gone awry , but it is not the only one. Altered brain-gut
interactions can have powerful ef fects on all of us.
The Little Brain in Your Gut
Imagine that you’re out to dinner with a good friend. The waiter has just
served you a medium-rare ribey e and you are reveling in the deliciousness
of the meal. Here is a short account of what happens the minute  you put the
first piece of steak in your mouth—though you may want to avoid making
what follows a part of your dinner conversation.
Even before you chew and swallow your food, your stomach fills with
concentrated hydrochloric acid that can be as acidic as battery acid. When
the partially chewed bites of steak get there, your stomach exerts grinding
forces so intense that they break up the steak into tiny particles.
Meanwhile, your gallbladder and pancreas are preparing the small
intestine to do its job, by inject ing bile to help digest fat, and a variety of
digestive enzym es. When your stomach passes the tiny steak particles to the
small intestine, the enzymes and bile break them down into nutrients that
the gut can absorb and transfer to the rest of the body .
As digestion proceeds, the muscles in your intestinal walls execute a
distinct pattern of muscular contractions called peristalsis, which moves
food down and through your digestive tract. The strength, length, and
direction of peristalsis depend  on the type of food you have ingested,
ensuring, for example, that the gut has more time to absorb fat and complex
carbohydrates, and less for a sugary drink.
At the same time, parts of your intestinal walls contract to steer the food
being digested to the lining of the small intestine, where nutrients are
absorbed. In your large intestine, powerful waves of contraction move
contents back and forth to enable the organ to extract and absorb  90 percent
of the water in intestinal contents. Another powerful wave of contraction
then moves contents toward the rectum, typically triggering an urge to have
a bowel movement.
Between meals , a different pressure wave—the migrating  motor
complex—serves as your gut’s housekeeper , sweeping out anything else
your stomach couldn’ t dissolve or break down into small enough pieces
such as undissolved medication s and unchewed peanuts. This wave slowly
travels from the esophagus to your rectum every ninety minutes, generating
enough pressure  to crack a Brazil nut and sweeping undesirab le microbes
from your small intestine into the colon. Unlike the peristaltic  reflex, this
housekeeping wave operates only when there’ s no food left to digest in your
GI tract—when you’re sleeping , for example—and it switches off as soon
you take your first bite of breakfast.
The gut can coordinate all this and more without any help from your
brain or spinal cord, and it is not the muscles making up your gut wall that
know how to do it. Instead, managing digestion is largely the work of your
enteric nervous system (ENS)— a remarkable network of 50 million nerve
cells wrapped around the intestine from the esophagus to the rectum. This
“second brain” may be smalle r than its three-pound counterpart in your
head, but when it comes to digestion, it’ s brilliant.
Michael Gershon, a prominent anatomist and cell biologist at Columbia
University Medical Center , a pioneer in studying the role of the gut’s
serotonin system, and author of the popular book The Second Brain , likes to
show a video clip that demonstrates the enteric nervous system ’s ability to
operate independ ently . In it, a section of guinea pig intestine sits in a bath of
fluid, and on its own propels a plastic pellet from one side of the intestine to
the other—all without any connection to the brain. In all likelihood, the
human gut can operate just as independently .
It’s remarkable  that all of these complex digestive functions are
coordinated autonomously by hardwired circuits—anatomic connections
between millions of nerve cells—within your enteric nervous system, and
that this is accomplished without much help from your brain or the rest of
your central nervous system—as long as everything goes well.
On the other hand, your emotional brain can mess up just about every
one of those seemingly automatic functions. If your dinner conversation
takes a wrong turn and you get into an argument with your friend, your
stomach’ s wond erful meatgrinding activity is quickly turned off and instead
goes into spastic  contractions that no longer allow it to empty properly . Half
of that tasty steak you ate will remain in your stomach without further
digestion. Long after you have left the restaurant, your stomach will still be
in spasm s as you lie awake. Because there is still food in your stomach, the
nocturnal migra ting contractions won’ t happen, preventing  the usual
overnight cleansing of your gut. In patients like Bill, who have a
hyperactive brain-gut axis to start out with, stress-related or emotional
triggers that won’ t cause much harm to a healthy individual will forcefully
inhibit stomach peristalsis and even reverse it, while at the same time
creating spastic contractions in his colon. It is as if the set points on the
warning system in his brain are off, triggering frequent false alarms, with
devastating consequences for his well-being.
Gunshots and Gut Reactions
Humans have always experienced emotion via their guts, and over the
years, many curious individua ls have tried to learn more about this
phenomenon. When army surgeon William Beaumont was presented with
the oppo rtunity to learn more about the gut-brain connection in 1822, he
didn’ t hesitate.
It was early summer , and Beaum ont was stationed at Fort Mack inac on
Mackinac Island , Michigan, in the upper reaches of Lake Huron. A fur
trapper named Alexis St. Martin had been accidentally shot with a musket
from less than a yard away . When Dr. Beaumont first saw him a half hour
after the accident, St. Martin had a hole the size of a man’ s hand in his
upper left abdomen. Looking into the wound, Beaumont could see the
man’ s stomach, which had a hole lar ge enough to fit an index finger .
Beaumont’ s excellent surgical care saved St. Martin’ s life, but he wasn’ t
able to close the man’ s stomach wound, and St. Martin ended up with a
gastric fistula—a permanent hole in his stomach that opened to the outside
of his body . After St. Martin recovered, he was no longer able do the
physical work of a fur trader , so when Beaumont relocated from Michigan
to Fort Niagara in New York State, he hired St. Martin to work with his
family as a live-in handyman, and the two became an unusual team of
investigator and study subject.
Before long, Beaumont became the first person in history to observe
human digestion in real time. He conducted an experiment with St. Martin
in which he tied small pieces of boiled beef, raw cabbage, stale bread, and
other foods to a silk string and then dangled them in St. Martin’ s stomach,
pulling them out at different times to test how “gastric juice” from the
stomach digested food. The experiments were difficult and uncomfortable
for St. Martin, who sometime s became upset and irritable. By directly
observing the changes that occurred in St. Martin’ s gastric activity ,
Beaumont concluded that the man’ s anger slowed his digestion. In this way,
Beaumont became the first scientist in history to report that your emotions
can influence the activity of your stomach.
Emotions impac t not just the stomach, but your entire digestive tract. As
reported by Weeks in 1946, an army physician working in a field during
World War II observed a wounded soldier who had suffered extensive
combat-related damage to the wall of his abdomen, exposing large portions
of his small and large intestine. Doctors observed that when this unfortunate
soldier ’s injured compatriots began to arrive in the same hospital ward,
causing the wounded soldier even more distress, the movement in both his
small and lar ge intestine became more active.
It took some twenty years from these graphic early wartime
observations to more scientific laboratory studies of mind-gut connections.
In the 1960s, an accomplished gastroenterologist at Dartmouth College’ s
school of medicine, Thomas Almy, examined a larger number of patients
under more controlled conditions. He conducted emotionally charged
interviews with healthy people and patients with irritable bowel syndrome
and monitored the colonic activity of both groups. When subjects reacted
with hostility and aggression, their colons contracted quickly , whereas when
they felt hopeless, inadequate, or self-reproaching, their colons contracted
more slowly . Later , other scientists confirmed these results and found that
colonic activity was increased only when topics discussed were personally
relevant to the subjects.
Today , scientists agree that the brain is hardwired to link the emotions
you experience every day with specific bodily responses. And when push
comes to shove, hardwiring directs our gut reac tions.
Here is an analogy that I like to use with my patients to help them
understand how the brain, enteric nervous system, and gut interact.
Imagine that a hurricane is approaching. The federal government
doesn’ t send emer gency instructions to every individual citizen in the
country . Instead, it sends instructions to a network of local agencies, which
can broadcast and implement the plans if needed. In the absence of a major
threat like a natural disaster , these local agencies can regulate most
everything on their own. But when a clear directive comes down from the
federal government during an emer gency , it overrides many routine
activities going on at the local level. Once the threat has passed, the country
returns quickly to its regular activities.
Similarly , your enteric nervous system can handle all routine challenges
related to digest ion. However , when you perceive a threat and feel afraid or
angry , the emotional brain center does not send individual instructions to
every single cell in the gastrointestinal tract. Instead, the brain’ s emotional
circuits signal the enteric nervous system to divert from its daily routine.
The digestive system switches back to local control once the emotion has
passed.
Your brain implements these motor programs in the gut through a
variety of mechanisms. It relea ses stress hormones such as cortisol and
adrenaline (also  known as epinephrine) and dispatches nerve signals to the
enteric nervous system. The brain sends two sets of nerve signals: those that
stimulate (carried by the parasympathetic nerves, including the vagus
nerve) and those that inhibit gut function (the sympathetic nerves). Usually
activated in tandem, the two nerve pathways do a remarkable job of
adjusting, fine-tu ning, and coordinating the activities of the enteric nervous
system to shape gut activity reflecting a particular emotion.
When your emotions play out in the theater of your gut, a large
ensemble of specialized cells are at work. The actors include various types
of gut cells, cells of the enteric  nervous system, and the gut’s 100 trillion
microbes—and the play’ s emotional overtones will alter their behavior and
their chemical conversations. The plots rotate throughout your day, and
include both negative and positive stories. On the one hand , there are
worries about your children; irritation when the guy in the next lane cuts
you off on the highway; anxiety  when you’re running late to the meeting;
fear of layof fs and financial stress.
On the other , there’ s also a hug from your spouse, kind words  from a
friend, or a pleasant family meal. While we have learned a lot about the gut
reactions associated with such negative emotions as anger , sorrow , and fear,
we know virtually nothing abou t the gut reactions to positive emotions such
as love,  bonding, and happiness. Does the brain refrain from interfering
with the activitie s of the enteric nervous system when everything is fine? Or
does it send a distinct set of nerve signals that reflect your state of
happiness? And what effect would such happy signals have on the gut
microbes, on gut sensitivity , and on the digestion of a meal? What happens
in your gut when you sit down for a meal with your family to celebrate the
graduation of your daughter from  college, or when you are in a blissful state
during a meditation retreat? These are important questions that science will
need to answer if we want to fully grasp the impact of gut reactions on our
well-being.
For some people, the plays performed in the gut include more thrillers and
horror stories than romantic comedies. Gut cells in a chronica lly angry or
anxious person,  using a script that dates back to childhood, may play out
dark plots day after day. Many gut cells in these people over time adapt to
accommodate the stage directions: nerve connections in the enteric nervous
system change, the sensors in the gut become more sensitive, the gut’s
serotonin-producing machinery shifts into higher gear, and even gut
microbes become more aggressive. It’s no surprise that when scientists
study the gut in patients with functional GI disorders, anxiety disorders,
depression, or autism, they find changes in the makeup and behavior of
many of these gut players, and the scientific literature is filled with such
observations. However , developing therapies targeted at such gut changes
has generally failed to provide symptomatic relief for patients  with these
disorders. On the other hand, one would expect that changing the playbook
of the brain to more positive stories, with the goal of altering the gut
reactions and thereby reversing the cellular changes in the gut, is more
promising. Studies are currently  under way to determine if gut microbial
changes are associated with positive mind-based interventions, such as
hypnosis and meditation, and if these changes lead to symptom
improvements in such disorders as irritable bowel syndrome.
How the Brain Programs the Gut’s Emotional
Responses
Today , we know a great deal about how emotion affects our bodies,
including our GI tract. To understand how it works, you first need to know
about the limbic  system, a prim itive brain system that we share  with other
warm-blooded animals and that plays a major role generating your
emotions. Deep in your gray matter , emotion-specific circuits  within the
limbic system get activated when you’re angry , scared, feel sexually
attracted, or hurt—and also when you feel hungry or thirsty .
Like a miniature  supercomputer , these circuits aim to adjust our bodies
to respond optimally to changes both inside and outside our bodies. When
we face a life-threatening situation, it can turn on a dime, quickly
rearranging thousands of messages to individual cells and organs
throughout the body , which shift their behavior just as quickly .
We’re all famili ar with what happens next. The emotion-relat ed brain
circuits send signals to the stomach and intestine to rid themselves of
contents that might otherwise drain energy required for action, which is
why you might need to head to the bathroom before your big presentation.
Our cardiovascular system reroutes oxygen-rich blood from the gut to the
muscles, slowing digestion and preparing us to fight (or flee).
We’re not alone in the anima l kingdom in these experiences: For
millions of years, mammals have needed to bond, fight, assess potential
threats, and sometimes flee. Evolution has bestowed upon us a collective
wisdom about how to best respond to these situations, and has packaged
that wisd om into specific circuits and programs that execute our reactions to
threats automatically . This saves time and energy in a mome nt of crisis
because without such hardwired  responses, we’d have to start from scratch
each time. These programs, known as emotional operating programs, can
activate within milliseconds, implementing a coordinated set of behaviors
that allow us to survive, thrive, and reproduce.
Jaak Panksepp, a neuroscientist at Washington State University who has
made important contributions to the field of affective neuroscience (which
applies neurosc ience to the study of emotion), has concluded from his
experiments on animals that our brains have at least seven  emotional
operating programs that direct the body’ s response to fear, anger , sorrow ,
play, lust, love, and maternal nurturance. They execute the appropriate set
of bodily responses quickly and automatically—even when you don’t know
you’re feeling a particular emotion. They make your face flush when you
feel embarrassed, give you goose bumps when you watch a scary movie,
make your heart beat faster when you’re scared, and make your gut more
sensitive when you are worried.
Our emotional operating program s are written in our genes. This genetic
coding is, in part, inherited from our parents, and it is also influenced by
events we experience early in life. For example, you may have inherited
genes that predispose your fear or anger program to overreact to stressful
situations. If you also experienc ed emotional trauma as a child , your body
added chemical tags to these key stress-response genes. The net result is
that as an adult,  you will most likely experience exaggerated gut reactions
to stress. This explains the common observation that two individuals
exposed to the same stressful situation may show very different  reactions to
it: while one does not experience any noticeable gut reaction, the other one
is incapa citated by nausea, stomach cramps, and diarrhea. While this early
programming for trouble may be a good thing for surviving in a dangerous
world, it is a liability if you live in the safety of a protected environment.
When the Gut Gets Stressed
Of all of our emotional operati ng programs, the one engaged by stressful
events is among  the best studie d. When you feel anxious or fearful, your
stress response is at work, trying to maintain a state of homeostasis, or
internal balance, in the face of internal or external threats.
When we talk about stress, we usually talk about stress from daily living
pressures, or larger stressors such as trauma or natural disaster s. But your
brain also perceives many bodily events as stressful, including infections,
surgeries, accidents, food poisoning, sleep deficits, attempts to stop
smoking, or even something as natural as a woman’ s menstrual period.
Let’s pull back the curtain on what happens in your body when  you’re
stressed. But first, you need to know more about the emotional brain’ s
impressive abilities. Life-threatening situations showcase them best.
If the brain decides there’ s a threat, it activates the stress program in the
brain, which then orchestrates the most appropriate response in our bodies,
including the gastrointestinal tract. Each of our emotional operating
programs uses a specific signal ing molecule, so the release of a particular
substance in the brain can trigger the engagement of the entire program
with all its consequences on the body and the gut. The brain ’s dedicated
signaling molecules include a few hormones you’ve probably heard about
before—endorphins, which act as a painkiller in the body and promotes a
feeling of well-being; dopamine, which triggers desire and motivation; and
oxytocin, which is sometimes called the “love hormone” and stimulates
feelings of trust and attraction. They also include the molecule mentioned
earlier known as corticotropin-r eleasing factor , or CRF, which acts as the
stress master switch.
Even if you’re perfectly healthy  and relaxing on a beach, CRF plays a
crucial role for your well-being by regulating the amount of the hormone
cortisol that is produced by your adrenal glands. Through its normal daily
fluctuations, cortisol maintains proper fat, protein, and carbohydrate
metabolism and helps keep the immune system in check.
However , when  the stress program is activated, there is a dramatic
increase in this CRF-cortisol system. When you are stressed, the first
responder in your brain is the hypothalamus, a small brain region that
controls all your vital functions and is the main production site for CRF.
Through a chemical intermediary , the CRF release is followed by activation
of the adrenal gland, which starts pumping out cortisol, thereby increasing
its level in the bloodstream and preparing the body for the expected
increased metabolic demand.
As the stress master switch, CRF released from the hypothalamus also
spreads locally to another brain region, the amygdala, which triggers a
feeling of anxiety or even fear. This activation of the amygdala plays out in
the body as heart palpitations, sweaty palms, and the urge to eliminate any
contents from the GI tract.
These stress-ind uced changes in your digestive system may not sound
like the ideal way to enjoy a meal, and they’re not. The next time you’re in
the midst of a particularly stressful day, just remember that you might not
want to eat a lar ge lunch.
Even if you eat when you’re more relaxed, there’ s still a chance you
could experience an unpleasant gut reaction to your meal. Once an
emotional motor program has been triggered, its effects may linger for
hours—or some times for years. Our thoughts, memories of past events, and
expectations of the future can influence the activities within our brain-gut
axis, and the consequences can sometimes be painful.
For exam ple, if you return to the restaurant where you argued with your
spouse over dinner , your memories may trigger your anger operating
program, despit e a friendly dinner conversation this time around. If that
restaurant was an Italian restaurant, any Italian restaurant or even the mere
thought of risotto di mare may trigger the anger program. I often explain
this scenario to my patients, who are quick to blame certain foods for
causing digestiv e distress. I ask them to explore whether it’s the food or in
fact a recollection of an earlier event that’s responsible for their symptoms.
When they start paying attenti on to the circumstances that trigger their
symptoms, they often realize the incredible power of the brain-gut
connection.
The Mirror in Your Gut
One of the most important piece s of information I can give to a patient like
Bill, with cyclical vomiting synd rome, or to patients with other disorders of
the brain -gut axis, is a simple, scientific explanation of what causes their
distressing symptoms, and how this information determines the treatment of
this condition. This simple explanation generally relieves the uncertainty
about the diagnosis, which tends to ease the patient’ s mind as well as the
family’ s. Science also forms the rational basis for tailoring an effective
therapy .
In the clinic, I told Bill that his brain was releasing too much CRF.
Excess CRF in his brain was prompting not just his feeling of anxiety , but
also the associated heart palpitations, sweaty palms, exaggerated stomach
contractions that reversed peristalsis and sent his stomach conte nts upward,
and excessive contractions of his colon, which were associated with
cramping pain and sent his stomach contents downward. Bill and his
mother were visibly relieved by the information, as it was apparently the
first time that anyone had given them a scientific explanation for his
symptoms.
“But why do the attacks always happen in the early morning hours?”
Bill’s mother wanted to know . I told her that the normal secretion of CRF in
the brain naturally peaks in the early morning hours, and gradually declines
until midday . So in patients with cyclical vomiting syndrome, brain CRF
would most likely reach unhealthy levels early in the morning.
I told them abou t how CRF declares an emer gency and shifts the body
from peacetime to war, to teach them how our brain and our gut’s nervous
system work together to direct gut function. “This makes total sense,” Bill
said, “but why does it happen in my case without any major stresses in the
middle of my sleep?”
“That’ s exactly where the probl em is,” I responded, explaining how the
normal brakes on his brain’ s emer gency mechanisms were faulty , which
caused trivial events to trigger his fear-related program. “This will result in
many false alarms,” I said.
“I am so glad that we finally know what’ s going on,” said his mother .
But an explanat ion only gets you halfway to a solution. She asked what
they could do to prevent the attacks from happening in the first place.
To help Bill prevent the vicious attacks that were keeping him from
living a full life, I prescribed several medications that calm hyperactive
stress circuits and the hyperarousal associated with the excessive CRF
release. Some of these aimed to reduce the frequency of his attacks, others
to stop an attack in its tracks should one occur . Fortunately , with proper
treatment, most cyclical vomitin g patients improve dramatically —they have
fewer attacks, and they get better at stopping a developing attack. Over
time, patients lose the fear of recurring attacks that had held them back,
which often allows them to reduce or discontinue the medication.
This was exactly what happened with Bill. When I saw him three
months later, he had only had a single episode, and he had stopped it by
taking Klonopin, an antianxiety medication I had prescribed. After years of
suffering and enduring humiliating comments from emer gency room
physicians, he was excited to finally be able to rebuild his life. Other
cyclical vomitin g patients I’ve seen have required additional treatments to
recover , including cognitive behavioral therapy and hypnosis. But Bill did
not. He resumed his college classes and was even able to greatly reduce his
medication over time.
We can all learn from patients like Bill, as I do every day in the clinic.
Normal gut reactions, such as worrying about a job interview , or transient
upsets from being stuck in traffic or running late to an appointment are
never a major problem. Howeve r, we should be mindful of the detrimental
effects of such emotions on our gut and its many residents when they occur
chronically , in the form of ange r, sorrow , or recurrent fear. Remember , the
stage on which these gut react ions play out is large, and the number of
actors is huge. This may not be such a big deal in the case of a feeling of
thirst, which we can easily quench with a glass of water , or an acute pain
that only lasts a few minutes. It is of greater concern when we recall that
emotions alway s have a mirror  image in our gut, and speculate about the
detrimental effects that chronic anger, sorrow , or fear may exert  not only on
our digestive health but on our overall well-being.
CHAPTER
3
HOW YOUR GUT TALKS TO YOUR BRAIN
From morning to night, as you wrestle with the responsibilities of
everyday life, how often do you think about what’ s happening in your
belly? If you’re like most peopl e, probably not much. But as quietly as our
guts usually go about their business, the events in your stomach and
intestines are momentous. To get a firsthand impression of these gut
sensations, try this experiment: take a day when you’re not too distracted,
and focus your attention from morning to night on all the sensations that
your gut generates throughout the day .
These are the sensations you normally wouldn’ t pay much attention to
—the subtle physical feelings and sounds, as well as the background
emotions that accompany them. Try to be mindful of as many of these
sensations as you can, and write them down on a sheet of pape r or dictate
them into your smartphone as they occur . You may also want to add
information about what you were doing at the time, how you were feeling,
and what you were eating. Here is an example of such an experiment—one
day’s worth of gut sensations performed by Judy, a healthy , twenty-six-
year-old researc h volunteer who participated in a study we cond ucted many
years ago.
Judy wakes up early on Sunday morning, has a cup of coffee, then goes
on her daily morning run. She doesn’ t eat anything before the three-mile
run because she knows from experience that running on a full stomach
interferes with her exercise. When she returns from her run, she makes her
weekly phone calls to her moth er and to a good friend. By the time she’s
done speaking with them, she is starving and craving her usual Sunday
breakfast—a mushroom omelet and a fresh sourdough baguette  with cream
cheese.
She enjoys the breakfast, gettin g a pleasant feeling from savoring this
favorite meal. At the same time,  she doesn’ t pay that much attention to what
she’s eating because she is reading an interesting article in the newspaper .
At some point she feels full and leaves half of the uneaten omelet on her
plate. She has made plans to go bicycling at the beach with her boyfriend,
and before she leaves the house, she needs to go to the bathroom for a
bowel movement. She and her boyfriend have a great time at the beach.
When she gets back home, it’ s 7 p.m.
After having a light dinner , Judy realizes that she hasn’ t spent any time
on a work presentation she has to give on Monday morning. She starts
worrying, and notices a queasy feeling in the pit of her stomach.  The feeling
slowly improves as she tries to finish her presentation and at 10 p.m., she
decides to go to bed and get up early the next morning to perfect the
presentation. She sets her alarm clock for 5:30 a.m. but doesn’ t sleep well.
Each time she wakes up, she notices a gurgling sensation in her belly;
sometimes it feels like a long, loud rumbling that slowly migrates down the
length of her abdomen. She finally gets up, goes to the kitchen, and finishes
the leftover omelet from breakfa st. The rumbling noises stop, and she feels
better and goes back to sleep.
When you think about it, you likely experience similar gut sensations on a
daily basis, although you may not be fully aware of them. We’ve all lived
with these sensations our entire lives, and they have become second nature.
From the perspe ctive of sheer survival, this general lack of attention to and
awareness of our gut sensa tions is a good thing: Navigating the
complexities and information overflow of the modern world is hard enough
already . Can you imagine spend ing each day focused on the rumblings and
contractions of your gut, or being forced awake every evening when
another wave of high-amplitude contractions sweeps through your GI tract?
If we had to continuously attend  to these sensations we wouldn’ t be able to
concentrate on anything else. You wouldn’ t be able to carry on a dinner
conversation, take a nap after lunch, read the New York Times Sunday
edition, or sleep through the night.
The only gut sensations that we are generally aware of are those that
require a response: a sensation of hunger that prompts us to eat something,
a sensation of satiety when it is time to stop eating, or a sensation of
fullness in our belly that makes  us look for a toilet. We remain blissfully
unaware of most gut sensations  until we experience some gastro-calamity
such as a stomac hache, heartburn, nausea, a persistent sense of bloating, or,
worse, a bout of food poisoning or a viral gastroenteritis. Or we may just
feel we ate too much and feel awful, even after eating a normal -sized meal.
Suddenly the sensory information from our gut becomes quite  relevant—
and usually for good reasons. These unpleasant sensations drive us to seek
help, and they help us avoid whatever caused our distress in the future by
making sure we never for get.
The Brain That Felt Too Much
While most people are consciously unaware of virtually all their gut
sensations, there  are some notable exceptions. One involves the very select
group of people who are easily able to feel their heartbeats and food moving
through their intestines. These individuals show an increased awareness of
all signals from their bodies, including those arising from the gut. In brain
imaging experim ents, they have been shown to have heightene d responses
of brain networks that are concerned with attention and salience assessment.
The other exceptions to this rule are the unfortunate 10 percent of the
population who perceive corrupted signals from their gut that don’t match
the actual sensory information transmitted to the brain. Out of the many
patients I have seen in my pract ice, one very pleasant gentleman stands out
in terms  of his unique history , which illustrates this concept of increased
awareness of bodily sensations.
Frank was a seventy-five-year -old retired schoolteacher who came to
see me with GI problems he had been experiencing over the last five years,
including typical IBS symptoms of abdominal bloating and discomfort, and
irregular bowel movements. However , the IBS symptoms were not his only
problem. He also experienced a chronic, unpleasant sensation that felt as if
something were stuck in the upper part of his esophagus (so called globus
sensation), frequent episodes of belching, sensations of discomfort behind
his sternum (his chest bone) that sometimes had a menthol-like quality and
made him cough, and the sensat ion of not getting enough air when taking a
breath. These symptoms started suddenly about five years before he came to
see me. The onset of his sympto ms coincided with the loss of his wife due
to a serious illness.
When I pressed for more information that would help me make a
diagnosis, Frank admitted that he had been experiencing mild IBS like
symptoms since childhood. As Frank had under gone repeated extensive
diagnostic evaluations of his chest, his gastrointestinal tract, and his heart,
which did not reveal any plausible cause for his symptoms, it seemed most
likely that he was suffering from some sort of functional gastrointestinal
disorder . His symptoms were most consistent with a generalized
hypersensitivity to gut sensations coming from different regions of his
gastrointestinal tract, from the beginning of his esophagus all the way to the
end of his colon . While some physicians might dismiss his symptoms as
purely psycholo gical in nature, we now know that there is an elaborate
sensory machinery located in our gastrointestinal tract, including the
specialized molecules (so-called receptors) that can recognize different
chemicals including menthol. But what could have triggered this
hypersensitivity in Frank five years ago?
Frank’ s partner provided one potential explanation: Frank had long been
eating an unhealthy diet, including foods high in animal fats and sugar . She
had noticed that his symptoms got worse when he couldn’ t control his
craving for chocolate cake, pizza, french fries, or rich cheeses. Is it possible
that these high-fat food items may have played a role in the sensitization of
his gut-brain communication? Patients like Frank are not only more
sensitive to normal gut functions , such as contractions, distensions, and acid
secretion. We know from many  studies in patients like Frank that some of
them are also more sensitive to experimental stimuli such as inflating a
balloon in their intestine, or exposing their esophagus to an acidic solution.
Given the comp lexity of the gut’s sensory system, it is no surprise that
this system is vulnerable to disturbances, like overreacting to normal food
components, or being hypersensitive to food additives or changes in food
supply that may not be good for us, but which are tolerated by the majority
of people without any symptom s. Could it be that people like Frank are the
canaries in the coal mine, the first to be af fected by some pending calamity?
More than 90 percent of the sensory information collected by your gut
never reaches conscious awaren ess. For most of us it’s easy to ignore the
daily sensations from our belly; yet the enteric nervous system is
monitoring them  very carefully . Through a complex system of sensory
mechanisms, many of your gut sensations are quietly directed to the little
brain in your gut, providing it with vital information to ensure optimal
functioning of your digestive system twenty-four hours a day. But a huge
flow of gut sensations is also directed upward, to the brain. Ninety percent
of the signals conveyed through  the vagus nerve travel from the gut to the
brain, while just 10 percent of the traffic runs in the opposite direction, from
the brain  to the gut. In fact, the gut can handle most of its activities without
any interference from the brain, while the brain seems to depend greatly on
vital information from the gut.
What information is your gut reporting on that’s so vital? Far more than
you might imagine. The many sensors in your gut inform the enteric
nervous system about everything it needs to know in order to generate the
most appropriate pattern of contractions, that is, the strength and direction
of the gut’s peristalsis to speed or slow the transit of ingested food through
the stomach and intestine, and to produce the right amount of acid and bile
to ensur e proper digestion. It gathers information pertaining to the presence
and amount of food in the stoma ch, the size and consistency of the food you
swallow , the chemical compos ition of an ingested meal, and even the
presence and activity of your community of gut microbiota. In case of an
emer gency , these sensors will also detect the presence of parasites, viruses,
or pathogenic bacteria, or their toxins, as well as the gut’s inflammatory
response. In fact, acute gut inflammation will make many of the sensors
more sensitive to normal stimuli and events. While this informa tion is vital
to ensur e proper functioning of the digestive tract, the enteric nervous
system has no ability to produ ce conscious sensations. When Gershon’ s
book, The Second Brain,  came out, it sparked much speculation about the
abilities of the enteric nervous system. Some even wondered if the second
brain not only is capable of perception, but may also be the seat of our
emotions and our unconscious mind. However , we can almost certainly say
that these speculations were false. The sensory information from the gut is
also sent to the brain in your head, and if you pay attenti on to these
sensations you will be able to feel them.
Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, our GI tract, enteric
nervous system, and brain are in constant communication . And this
communication network may be more important for your overall health and
well-being than you ever could have imagined.
Sensing with Your Gut
Take a bite of juicy hambur ger, enjoy a piece of fresh, crisp y baguette,
savor a cup of New England clam chowder , or revel in the exquisite flavor
of a good piece of chocolate. What do you taste?
The answer will be supplied to you by the collection of receptors
located on the taste buds of your tongue. These molecules embedded in the
outer membrane  of a cell recognize the specific chemicals in anything you
eat or drink, as a lock recognizes a key. When this receptor binds to such a
chemical on a food item, it sends a message to your brain, and your brain
constructs the particular taste from the streams of sensory information it
receives from your mouth and tongue.
The taste receptors on your tongue can detect five distinct taste
qualities, includ ing sweet, bitter , savory , sour, and umami; the combination
of these qualities in any bite of food determines its flavor . In addition, the
texture of what you eat—the crunchiness of a carrot, the smoothness of
yogurt, or the unique texture of a spaghetti squash—stimulates  another set
of receptors, which specialize in recognizing mechanical qualities of food.
The combination of all of these sensations encoded in your mouth creates
the expe rience that you know as taste. Food companies are masters in
designing foods that maximize this experience.
Amazingly , recent research has shown that some of the same
mechanisms and molecules that are involved in the taste experi ence are not
limited to your mouth, but are also distributed throu ghout our
gastrointestinal tract. Science has unequivocally shown that this is the case
for the bitter and sweet taste receptors. In fact, evidence for some twenty-
five different bitter taste receptors has been found in the human gut. While
we know that the gut taste receptors have little or nothing to do with our
taste experience, we also know very little about their functions  in the gut-
brain axis. However , these recep tor molecules are located on sensory nerve
endings and on the hormone-containing transducer cells in the gut wall
(such as the serotonin-contain ing cells we discussed in the previous
chapter), which puts them in a perfect location to participate in the gut-brain
dialogue.
Some of these receptors are activated by specific molecules found in
herbs and spices like garlic, hot chili pepper , mustard, and wasabi, while
others respond to menthol, camphor , peppermint, cooling agents, and even
cannabis. To date, twenty-eight of these so-called phytochemical receptors
(receptors that recognize specific chemicals in plants) have been identified
in the mouse intestine alone, and there is no reason to doubt that our human
intestines have a similar or even greater diversity of receptors that are
sensitive to a variety of chemicals contained in plants.
Most of us use spices and herbs to stimulate the taste receptor s on our
tongues, thereby  enhancing the flavor of a meal. A growing numbe r of
individuals who believe in natural treatments consume herbs or their
extracts specific ally for medicinal purposes, and herbologists can tell you a
litany of empirically derived health benefits for all of them. However , in
many parts of the world, spices are an integral part of the culture: who
could imagine Indian or Mexican foods without chili peppers, Persian food
without an assortment of fresh herbs and yogurt, or Moroccan  tea without
peppermint?
It is plausible that regional and geographic differences in people’ s taste
preferences for various herbs and spices have evolved to enco urage their
consumption, and provide protection against common illnesses prevalent in
different parts of the world. For example, does the consumption of spicy
foods in many parts of the developing world protect people from
gastrointestinal infections? And does the consumption of fresh herbs in
Persian dishes, or the obligato ry consumption of peppermint  tea after a
meal in Morocc o, prevent indigestion? Regardless of how we explain their
prevalent use all over the world , these plant-derived substances link us and
our gut-brain axis closely to the diversity of plants around us. The multitude
of phytochemica ls derived from a diet rich in diverse plants, combined with
the array of perfectly matching sensory mechanisms in our gut,
synchronizes our internal ecosystem (our gut microbiome) with the world
around us.
Why are there so many sensors in our gut? Some receptors, like those
that sense for sweet food, play an important role in the way we metabolize
our food. When our sweet receptors sense glucose (created when
carbohydrates are digested) or artificial sweeteners, they stimulate the
absorption of glucose into the bloodstream, and the release of insulin from
the panc reas. They also stimulate the release of several other hormones that
signal to the brain and create a sense of satiety .
The function of the gut’s bitter taste receptors remains someth ing of a
mystery . My colleague Catia Sternini, a neuroscientist at UCLA  who’ s an
expert on the enteric nervous system and who focuses on intestinal taste
receptors, speculates that some of these receptors may respond to
metabolites produced by intestinal microbiota, and that alterations in these
receptors as a consequence of high fat intake and fat-related changes in gut
microbiota could play a role in obesity . In a collaborative study , we have
recently demonstrated support for this hypothesis in obese subjects.
There are other possible roles that have been proposed for the bitter
taste receptors in the gastroin testinal tract. Their stimulation has been
shown to result in the release of the gut hormone ghrelin, also known as the
hunger hormone , which travels to the brain to stimulate appetite . I wouldn’ t
be surprised if the ancient habit in many European countries of drinking a
bitter aperitif before meals developed because of the aperitifs’  ability to
stimulate bitter taste receptors in the gut to release ghrelin and thus increase
the appetite.
Think, too, of all the horrendous-tasting bitter herbal medicines
employed in traditional Chinese  medicine. It seems much more likely that
their therapeutic effects have little to do with the bitter taste experience they
give you, but are related in some way to the activation of one or more of the
gut’s twenty-five bitter receptors , thereby sending healing messages to your
brain and body . Even more intriguing is the recent evidence that the same
nasal olfactory receptors we use to enjoy the smell of roses, detect a carton
of spoiled milk, or sniff out a good barbecue joint are also spread
throughout the intestinal tract. Like the gut’s taste receptors, these gut
olfactory recept ors are located primarily on endocrine cells, where they
control the release of dif ferent hormones.
Since taste and olfactory receptors are located throughout the GI tract,
rather than only in the mouth and nose, their original names— “taste” and
“smell”—have become somewhat obsolete. Instead, scientists now
understand that these receptor s are part of a large family of chemical
sensing  mechanisms that are found in the lungs and other viscera, and play
different roles depending on their location in different organs. Based on
what we know today , I wouldn’ t be surprised if these chemical sensors are
able to pick up messages from the different microbial communit ies living in
these or gans.
How does the nervous system obtain its share of this vital information
from inside of your messy gut? It would hardly make sense for this high-
performance data collection system to be immersed in the messy world of
partially digested food and corrosive chemicals moving through the gut. In
fact, it’s not: the neurons themselves sit inside the gut lining, out of direct
contact with the gut’s contents, and rely on specialized gut-lining cells that
do face the inside of the gut to sense events there. Those cells signal to
intermediaries in the gut wall, in particular the various endocri ne cells that
in turn signal to nearby sensory neurons, in particular the vagus nerve. To
date, a large number of different sensory neurons have been identified that
are each specialized for a specif ic aspect of gut sensations and respond to a
particular molecule released by the gut’s endocrine cells. Each of these
nerves will send signals to the enteric nervous system or to the brain.
The gut’s endoc rine cells are so abundant and so deft at signaling our
nervous system that they play crucial roles in our health and well-being.
Imagine for a moment that you could compress all these hormone-
containing cells in your gut into one single clump of cells: it would be the
biggest endocrine organ in our bodies. Endocrine cells that line the gut from
the stom ach all the way to the end of the large intestine can sense a wide
range of chemic als contained in what we eat and which are produced by the
microbiota. For example, when your stomach is empty , special ized cells in
the stom ach wall produce a hormone called ghrelin, which travels via your
bloodstream or signals via the vagus nerve to your brain, where it triggers a
strong urge to eat. On the other hand, when you’re satiated and your small
intestine is busy digesting your food, cells there release “satiety ” hormones
that tell your brain that you’re full and it’s time to call a halt to further
eating.
In addition to the gut-brain communication channel involving the
endocrine cells,  there is anothe r system involving our gut-based immune
system and the inflammatory molecules these immune cells produce, the so
called cytokines . The immune cells living in our gut are preferentially
located in clusters in the small intestine known as Peyer ’s patches, and are
also found in our appendix and scattered throughout the wall of the small
and large intestine. The gut-based immune cells are separated by a tiny
layer of cells from the space inside the gut, and some of them, the so-called
dendritic cells, even extend through the gut layer , where they can interact
with our gut microbes and with potential harmful pathogens. Most
important, cytok ines released from these cells can cross the gut lining, enter
the systemic circulation, and ultimately reach the brain. Alternatively , the
signaling molecules released from hormone-containing gut cells signal to
the brain via the vagus nerve.
With so many mechanisms involved in informing our nervous system
about aspects of the foods we ingest, it is becoming clear that our gut is
designed to do far more than just absorb nutrients. The gut’s elaborate
sensory systems  are the National Security Agency of the human body ,
gathering information from all areas of the digestive system, including the
esophagus, stom ach, and intestine, ignoring the great majority of signals,
but triggering alarm when some thing looks suspicious or goes wrong. As it
turns out, it’ s one of the most complex sensory or gans of the body .
Total Gut Awareness
Whenever you consume food or drink, reports from your intestinal data
collection system provide a variety of vital information to both the little
brain in your gut (your enteric nervous system) and the brain in your head.
Your big and little brains are both interested in obtaining these reports
whenever you consume food or drink, but they’re interested in different
aspects of this information.
Your little brain needs vital infor mation from the gut to generate optimal
digestive responses and, when necessary , to eliminate toxins by expelling
the intestinal content from either end of the GI tract by vomiting or
diarrhea. These reports cover the size of the meal, the contents that are
entering the gut (including chemical information such as fat, protein, and
carbohydrate content, as well as concentrations, consistencies, and particle
sizes). They also include intelligence revealing any signs  of hostile
intruders such as bacteria, viruses, or other toxins from contaminated food.
When it obtains  information about the high fat content of a rich dessert
entering your stomach, it will slow the rate of gastric emptying and
intestinal transit. When it obtains information about the low caloric density
of a meal, it will speed up its emptying from the stomach to deliver enough
calories for absorption. And when it obtains information about potentially
harmful intruders, it will stimulate water secretion, change the direction of
peristalsis to empty the stomach  from its content, and accelerate the transit
throughout the small and lar ge intestine to expel the of fending agent.
Your brain, on the other hand,  is more concerned with your overall
health and well- being and as such it monitors different cues from your gut
and integrates them with a variety of signals from other parts of your body
as well as inform ation about your environment. It monitors what  is going on
in the enteric nervous system, but in addition is closely interested in your
gut reactions, the state of the gut reflecting your emotions, the wrenching
contractions of your stomach and colon when you are angry , and the
absence of intestinal activity when you are depressed. In other words, the
brain watches its own theater being played out on the stage of the gut. The
brain almost certainly also recei ves information generated by the trillions of
microbes living in the gut, an aspect of gut-brain signaling that only came
into focus during the past few years. While the brain constantly monitors all
sensory informa tion coming from the gut, it delegates the day-to-day
responsibilities to local agencies, in our case the enteric nervous system.
The brain only gets directly involved in the action if an action is required by
you, or if the situation poses a significant threat that warrants a brain
response.
Through these various sensory mechanisms, your gut informs your
brain every millisecond of the day, whether you’re awake or asleep, about
everything taking place deep inside you. It’s not the only organ providing
ongoing feedba ck to the central nervous system: Your brain continually
receives sensory  information from every cell and organ in your body . Your
lungs and diaphragm transmit mechanical signals to the brain every time
you inhale and exhale, your heart generates mechanical signals with each
heartbeat, your artery walls send signals about blood pressure, and your
muscles transmit information about their tone or tightness.
Scientists call these ongoing reports about the state of the body
“interoceptive” information—information that the brain then uses to keep
the body’s systems balanced and functioning smoothly . Although
interoceptive information comes from every single cell of the body , the
messages the gut and its sensory mechanisms send to our brain are unique
in their sheer number , variety , and complexity . Start with the fact your gut’s
sensory network is distributed over the gut’s entire surface area, which is
two hundred times larger than the surface area of your skin—ab out the size
of a basketball court. Now imagine a basketball court with millions of tiny
mechanical sensors that collect information about the movement of the
players, their weight, their acceleration and deceleration, and about every
jump and landing. Since the gut’s signals also include chemical, nutritional,
and other information, this metaphor only begins to describe the vast
amount of information encoded as gut sensations.
The Information Highway for Gut-Brain Traffic
The vagus nerve plays a particularly important role in communicating gut
sensations to the brain. The great majority of gut cells and receptors that
encode gut sensations are closely linked to the brain via the vagus nerve.
And much of the signaling of our gut microbiota to the brain relies on this
pathway as well. In the majority of rodent studies on the effects of gut
microbial chang es on emotional behaviors, the effects were no longer seen
after the vagus nerve was cut. But the vagus nerve is more than a one-way
communication channel: This nerve is a six-lane freeway , allowing rush
hour traffic in both directions, though 90 percent of this traffic flows from
gut to brain. The vagus nerve carries so much traffic because it’s one of the
most important regulators of our viscera, linking the brain not just to the GI
tract but to all other or gans as well.
The following patient anecdote illustrates how important this gut-brain
communication system is for our overall well-being. During my training at
UCLA, I met Geor ge Miller , who had long suffered from symptoms of a
large ulcer in his duodenum—th e first part of the small intestine. Not only
was he miserable and in pain whenever his ulcer flared up, but he had to be
hospitalized twice when his ulcer started to bleed acutely . After he had been
suffering from these symptoms for years, the decision was made by his
gastroenterologist to refer him to a surgeon to cut his vagus nerve, there by
removing its ability to stimulate acid production in the stomach. The
personal stories and symptom histories experienced by patients like Miller
following their vagotomies revealed a great deal about gut sensations and
what happens to people when you deprive the brain of this vital source of
interoceptive information.
In the early 1980s, the prevailing view in the medical and surgical
community was that the simplest and most effective way to stop excess acid
production and cure peptic ulcers was to cut the vagus nerve—a procedure
known as a truncal vagotomy . These surgeries were done with little
consideration for the massive flow of information through the vagus nerve
from the gut to the brain, and the possible importance of this information
flow to our overall well-being. Fortunately , surgeons rarely resort to such
drastic procedures today , since we can now treat the great majority of ulcers
medically .
In Mille r’s case, his surgery had been successful, in that his ulcer no
longer troubled him. But the price he paid was enormous. From  that point
on, he suffered an array of unpleasant gut sensations. He felt full after even
a small meal and endured constant nausea and vomiting, cramps , belly pain,
and diarrhea, among other symptoms.
Miller ’s doctors could not explain his symptoms, which also included
obscure symptoms such as heart palpitations, sweating, lightheadedness,
and extreme fatigue, so they blamed his alleged neuroticism and labeled his
constellation of symptoms a case of “albatross syndrome,” a term once used
to describe patients like Mille r whose peptic ulcer surgery successfully
treated their gastric ulcers but left them with a range of aversive gut
sensation, lastin g abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and poor food intake.
But we now know that for many of these patients at least, their symptoms
had a very solid physiological basis.
Today we know about the complexity of gut sensations and the crucial
role the vagus nerve plays in transmitting these signals to brain regions like
the hypothalamus and limbic brain regions, which in turn influ ence a wide
range of vital functions such as pain, appetite, mood, and even cognitive
function. In hindsight, it is easy to see that obstructing this vital information
highway (like closing the 405 freeway in Los Angeles in both directions)
would have profound effects on how someone feels when they wake up in
the morning, or when they eat.
It’s unlikely we’ll ever know the exact mechanisms behind Miller ’s
symptoms, since vagotomies are rarely performed today . On the other hand,
there has been a renewed intere st in studying the role of the vagus nerve in
transmitting gut sensations to major control centers in the brain. Electrical
or pharmacological vagal stimu lation has been evaluated as a novel way to
simulate gut sensations, and as therapy to treat a range of brain disorders,
including depression, epilepsy , chronic pain, obesity , and even various
chronic inflammatory diseases such as arthritis. These new findings further
confirm the importance of vagal-gut-brain communication to people’ s
health and well-being.
The Role of Serotonin
Among the most wrenching of gut sensations are those associated with food
poisoning, and about forty years ago I became more closely acquainted with
them than I had hoped. I was finishing a four-week backpac king trip in
India. The journey had taken me past peaceful Buddhist monasteries and
peach-tree-covered oases, and through deserted valleys and mountain
passes from northern India to the foothills of the Himalayas.  I had been
subsisting on daily rations of lentil soup, rice, and butter tea, drinking water
directly from pristine streams. I’ve rarely felt as elated as I did when I
arrived in the hill station city of Manali, and to celebrate I departed  from
my usual routine and treated myself to a delicious and spicy meal at one of
the local restaurants.
Early the next morning, I boarded the bus for a twenty-four -hour ride to
New Delhi—a day that shall forever live in digestive infamy . Trying to
control the gastrointestinal consequences of that meal was like telling an
attacking pack of hyenas to lie down and roll over. The intensity of this
experience engraved itself into the deepest layers of my emotional memory
—a permanent reminder of just how powerful gut sensations (and their
memories) can be.
Food poisoning occurs when you accidentally ingest a drink or a meal
contaminated with a pathogenic virus, bacterium, or a toxin produced by
these microor ganisms. Let’s say it’s the toxin of an invasive species of E.
coli. In your intestin e, the toxin binds to receptors located on the serotonin-
containing cells. This signal immediately switches your GI tract’ s setting to
“horrific vomitin g and hurricane-like diarrhea.” Some cancer chemotherapy
drugs, including cisplatin, do the same thing.
This is an inbuil t survival mechanism: when your gut detects enough of
a toxin or pathog en, your enteric nervous system issues an evacuation order
to your entire GI tract aimed at expelling the toxin from both ends of your
digestive tract—a smart reaction, if not a pretty one.
The reaction is driven by serotonin-containing cells in the upper gut,
which are particularly importan t in the generation of gut sensations. When
secreted under normal conditions, serotonin helps the digestive process
proceed in regular fashion. It is released by subtle mechanical shearing
forces exerted when the gut’s contents slide along the GI tract and rub
against what are known as enterochromaf fin cells. Just like the other
hormones contained in the endocrine cells of the gut, the released serotonin
activates sensory  nerve endings in the vagus nerve and the enteric nervous
system (ENS), which in turn keep the ENS informed about what is moving
down the intestinal tract, enabling it to trigger the all-important peristaltic
reflex. A more concentrated serotonin release, such as occurs with food
poisoning or in response to the chemotherapeutic agent cispl atin, on the
other hand, will lead to vomiting, intensive bowel movements, or both.
My research group, working with a group from the Netherlands, found
that in healthy subjects, a diet deficient in the amino acid tryptophan,
essential for making serotonin, lowers brain serotonin levels, which
increases activity of the brain’ s arousal network. These central nervous
system changes are also associated with increased sensitivity to an
experimental mechanical stimulation of the colon. The same serotonin-
lowering diet had previously been shown to increase the likelihood of
depression in at-risk individual s, including those with a famil y history of
depression.
Serotonin is the ultimate gut-brain signaling molecule. Serotonin-
containing cells are intricately connected to both our little brain in the gut
and to our big brain. This gut-based serotonin-signaling system  plays a key
role in linking events in the gut related to food, intestinal microbes, and
certain medications to the activity of our digestive system, and to the way
we feel. On the other hand, the small amount of serotonin contained in
nerves in the gut and in the brain plays crucial roles as well: serotonin-
containing nerves in the gut play a key role in regulating the peristaltic
reflex, while clusters of nerve cells in the brain send their signals to most
regions of the brain, exerting an influence over a wide range of vital
functions, including appetite, pain sensitivity , and mood.
Mike Gershon, pioneering researcher of the gut’s serotonin system, likes
to say that the only time you’ll ever be aware of gut sensations related to the
gut-serotonin system is when the news is bad—or in some cases very bad,
like my hellish bus ride to New  Delhi. But is that really so? Let’s leave
aside for a moment the dramatic events that unfold when a bacterial or viral
infection trigger s a massive serotonin release, or when an alteration in the
gut’s serotonin system produces  IBS symptoms or diarrhea. Given the gut’s
enormous serotonin stores, located close to vagal nerve pathways that link
directly to the brain’ s affective control centers, it’s certainly conceivable
that a constant stream of low-level, serotonin-related gut signa ls are being
sent to our brain’ s emotional centers, in response to intestinal contents
rubbing against the serotonin-packed cells, or in response to gut microbial
metabolites. Even if these serotonin-encoded signals don’t enter our
conscious awareness, this low-level serotonin release could affect our
background emotions and influe nce how we feel, exerting a positive “tone”
on our mood—which in turn could explain why so many people experience
a sense of conte ntment and well-being around the ingestion of an enjoyable
meal.
Food as Information
All of this raise s an important question: If the great majority of us don’t
consciously perceive the vast majority of our gut sensations—including the
twofold distensi on of the stomac h after eating a big meal, or the nutcracker -
like contractions of the migrating motor complex when our gut is empty—
then why does the gut need its specialized sensory apparatus?
The simple and scientifically supported answer is that these sensing
mechanisms are essential to the smooth operation and coordination of basic
gut functions such as gastric emptying, movement of food through the
intestines, and the secretion of acid and digestive enzymes; to body
functions related  to food intake , such as appetite and satiation ; and to our
basic metabolism, including blood sugar control. These functional aspects
of gut sensations most likely go back millions of years, to when tiny,
primitive marine animals were “colonized” by microor ganisms that helped
them metabolize certain nutrients.
The other , more provocative answer to the question of why this gut
sensory system exists has to do with the massive information flow from our
gut to our brains—information that is not directly related to our gut
functions and our metabolic needs, and that remains largely below our radar
screens. The massive amount of gut-related information being  sent to the
brain, which includes a barrage of messages from the trillions of microbes
living in our gut, gives the gut-brain axis a unique and unexpected role in
modulating our health and well- being, our feelings, and even—as we’ll see
in Chapter 5—the decisions we make.
When we consider the scientific complexities of the various gut sensors and
the vagus nerve, together with their functions in the digestive process, and
place them into the overall context of gut sensations, a revolutionary picture
of our eating habits emer ges: not only is our digestive tract able to absorb
most of the nutrients and calories contained in a meal (with our intestinal
microbes taking  care of the leftovers that our gut cannot digest), but the
gut’s sophistica ted surveillance system can actually analyze food’ s
nutritional conte nt and, at the same time, extract the information needed for
its optimal digestion. In other words, food comes with its own instructions
for how to optimally digest it, and with a lot of fine print that until recently
we didn’t even know about, and are still trying to figure out the meaning of.
This is true whether you are a vegan, pescatarian, omnivore, meat-meister ,
fast-food junkie, serial dieter , episodic faster—or even if you recently
picked up a gut infection while traveling in Mexico. Most remarkably , the
gut’s intricate sensory system begins extracting this information the second
the food enters our mouth—whe n taste receptors on our tongue  and enteric
nerves in our esophagus begin transmit ting information  about what we’re
ingesting—and continues doing so until the food ends up in our colon. And
our gut does all this without interfering in any way with our daily
functioning.
When we consider the dense distribution and vast area that the gut’s
sensory receptors occupy on the lining of our gut wall, it’s clear that our gut
is transmitting immense amounts of information to the brain at any given
moment, both from the complex processes related to digestion and also
from the input of 100 trillion chattering microbes in our intestinal tracts. In
other words, when it comes to collecting, storing, analyzing, and
responding to massive amounts of information, the gut-brain axis is a true
supercomputer—a far cry from the plodding digestive steam engine it was
once thought to be.
This realization is all part of our new, modern understanding of gut
function, which includes a shift from a preoccupation with detai ls of macro-
and micronutrients, metabolism, and calories to the knowledge that our gut
with its nervous  system and its microbial residents is actually an amazing
information-processing machine that greatly surpasses our brains in terms
of the number of cells involved and rivals some of the brain’ s capabilities.
Through our food supply this system connects us closely to the world
around us, picki ng up vital information about how our food is grown, what
we put into our soil, and what chemicals were added to it before we buy it
in the supermar ket. And as we will learn in greater detail in the following
chapter , the gut microbes play a prominent role in this connection between
what we eat, and how we feel.
CHAPTER
4
MICROBE-SPEAK: A KEY COMPONENT OF
THE GUT-BRAIN DIALOGUE
In the 1970s and 1980s, the leading research on gut-brain comm unication
could be found at the Center for Ulcer Research and Education (CURE), on
the campus of the U.S. Veterans  Administration (now the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs) in West Los Angeles. Founded by Morton I. Grossman,
one of the preeminent physiolog ists of the digestive system, CURE was the
mecca for scientists and clinical investigators worldwide who wanted to
study stomach ulcers (which were a major health problem at the time) and,
more generally , the fundamenta l mechanisms of how the diges tive system
operates. Books have been written and stories are still told about the center ,
its scientific breakthroughs, its founder and charismatic leader , and a
disciple of Grossman named John Walsh.
When I arrived in Los Angeles in the early 1980s to work at CURE as a
research fellow , my goal was to study the biology of communication within
the gastrointest inal tract. The topic of gut-brain interactions had been
completely absent from my medical school curriculum at Ludwig
Maximilian University , in Munich, Germany . I had just completed my
residency in internal medicine at the University of British Columbia, in
Vancouver , and I couldn’ t wait to start what was initially conceived as a
two-year research training fellowship to pursue my scientific interest.
At the time, John Walsh was a young, brilliant investigator who made a
lot of his vision ary decisions and discoveries based on his gut feelings—
something I only realized much later in my life. He had a career -long
interest in a group of then-mysterious signaling molecules called “gut
hormones” or “gut peptides,” which had first been isolated from the skin of
exotic frogs and later from the guts and the brains of mammals. At the time,
biologists thought that these signaling molecules worked as simple
chemical switch es that turned on or off the stomach’ s production of
hydrochloric acid, or the pancreas’ s secretion of digestive hormones, or the
gallbladder ’s ability to contract.  But over the next few remarkable years in
this cradle of modern gut-brain research, I would watch firsthand as our
understanding of these signaling molecules evolved from simple on-of f
switches to a complex universal biological language that the trillions of
microbes in our intestines use to communicate with our digestive system
and even our brain.
A group  of Italian biologists under the leadership of Vittorio Erspamer
had discovered some of the first gut peptides in the skin of exotic frogs,
where their role seemed to be to help deter predators.  When an
inexperienced young bird ingested such a frog, these molecules would be
released in its GI tract, triggering a bad gut reaction that spoiled the meal
and caused the bird to regur gitate the frog. This taught the young bird not to
touch that type of frog in the future. And since the frog produce d a peptide
to which the bird’ s tissues reacted, the results proved that frogs and birds
shared a chemical communication system.
Not long after the Italians reported their results, Viktor Mutt and his
colleagues at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden searched for similar gut
peptides in mammals. Eventually they extracted and purified these
molecules on an industrial scale from cooked pig intestines, and they
distributed them  to interested investigators around the world. When these
precious extracts were shipped in powder form to Walsh’ s laboratory , we
treated them with awe, considering the amount of work and time that had
been invested to isolate them. Later, we headed out to a Los Angeles-area
slaughterhouse in the early morning hours, returning with containers of pig
intestines from which we purified the gut peptides ourselves. When we
injected one of these substances, a molecule called gastrin, we observed that
the anim al’s stomach started ramping up its secretion of hydrochloric acid.
Injecting another gut peptide— secretin—turned on secretion of digestive
juices from the pancreas, while injecting the peptide somatostatin tended to
turn both functions off. These gut peptides have also been called gut
hormones, as they were able to reach distant targets in the body when
injected into the bloodstream, just as hormones produced by the thyroid
gland or the ovaries can send long-distance messages.
It didn’ t take long for scientists to discover that gut peptides were
present not only in the intestine’ s hormone-containing cells, but also in the
nerve cells of the enteric nervous system, which used them to fine-tune
peristalsis, fluid absorption, and secretion. And when neuroscientists started
looking in the brain, they found identical substances. There the peptides
functioned as important chem ical switches that could turn on and off
various behavio rs and motor programs involved in hunger , anger , fear, and
anxiety .
The story took an unexpected turn in the early 1980s when a group of
scientists at the National Institutes of Health, led by visionary biologists
Jesse Roth and Derek LeRoith, wanted to find out if microor ganisms were
capable of producing the same signal ing molecules that Walsh, Mutt , and
Erspamer had isolated from frogs, pigs, dogs, and other animals . They grew
different microor ganisms in a nutrient-containing broth, separated the
microor ganisms from the broth,  and tested them for the presence of insulin,
the hormone that signals our tissues to store ener gy from sugar after a meal.
In both the cells and the broth, they found molecules similar to human
insulin—similar enough that the molecules stimulated lab-grown fat cells
from rats to sock away energy from sugar . This dramatic result suggested
for the first time that insulin did not originally appear in animals, as
biologists had thought, but was already present in more primitive single-
celled or ganisms that arose about a billion years ago.
I first learned about LeRoith and Roth’ s fascinating research when they
sent extracts from other microbes to Walsh’ s laboratory at CURE, which
used the radioim munoassay tests to identify and quantify these  molecules.
These studies yielded surpris ing results: in addition to insulin, my
colleagues found molecules similar to other mammalian gut peptides.
Ancient microbi al versions of many gut peptides and hormones, including
noradrenaline, endorphins, and serotonin and their receptors, have since
been identified.
Roth and LeRoith summarized their findings in a 1982 review article in
the New England Journal of Medicine , writing  that the signaling mole cules
that our endocrine system and brain use to communicate probably
originated in microbes. Several years later, I became so intrigued by this
evolving science  that I decided to write a speculative review article myself,
in collaboration with my friend Pierre Baldi, a brilliant mathematician then
working at the California Institute of Technology . Even though a prominent
linguistic professor at UCLA  tried to convince me that you can only talk
about language in the context of human communication, we gave it the title
“Are Gut Peptides the Words of a Universal Biolog ical Language.”  The
article was published in the American Journal of Physiology  in 1991.
When I showed  the manuscript to Walsh, he jokingly said: “You’re
lucky this speculative paper was accepted for publication. These ideas are
about thirty years ahead of their time.” (As usual with his visionary
statements, his prediction wasn ’t very far off.) In the article, we proposed
that these signaling molecules represent the words of a universa l biological
language used not only by the gut, but also by the nervous system,
including the little brain and the big brain, and by the immune system.
Humans were not the only organisms using this cellular communication
system: science had demonstra ted that frogs, plants, and even microbes
living inside our intestines used it as well. By applying a mathematical
approach called  information theory to the biological data, we even
speculated about the amount of information that different types of signaling
molecules—from hormones to neurotransmitters—were able to send
between dif ferent cells and or gans.
Unfortunately , the time was not yet ripe for the rest of the scientific
world to realize the impact of these early discoveries. As Walsh predicted, it
would take nearly three decade s of research into brain-gut interactions for
gut microbes to again take center stage.
The Downside of Early Gut Cleansing
Dahlia walked into my clinic in black clothing and dark sung lasses, as if
she were  on her way to a funera l. Having seen many such patien ts, I wasn’ t
surprised by her appearance. The dark glasses may have been due to an
extreme sensitiv ity to light, which is often associated with migraines. Or
perhaps her outfit was a cloak  that Dahlia, a forty-five-year -old woman,
was wearing to try to hide her feelings of chagrin.
Dahlia had made the appointment to get help with her intractable
constipation, but her medical problems were not limited to her bowel
movements. Other symptoms included chronic pain all over her body ,
fatigue, and migraine headach es. During my conversations with her, it
became clear that Dahlia was also chronically depressed, a situation that she
attributed solely  to her gastrointestinal issues. She told me that her
difficulties with regular bowel movements dated back to infancy , when her
mother gave her regular enemas —a common practice that many mothers of
the era employed to ensure daily bowel movements in their children.
Regrettably , the only way Dahlia could guarantee regular bowel
movements was by taking daily  enemas and by receiving high colonics (a
more extensive enema in whic h warm water is injected into the upper
colon) on a weekly basis. Without the daily enemas, she said, she was
unable to have any spontaneous  bowel movements for up to several weeks
at a time. Dahlia  insisted that her colon was “dead” and was no longer able
to transport any of its contents, and she was terrified that she would
experience unbearable discomfort if she didn’ t induce a daily bowel
movement. These facts, combined with her fear of disco mfort from
constipation, had fostered a strong belief that she would never be able to
stop this enema regimen.
Dahlia had tried many previous therapeutic approaches, which had all
failed, and treating her depression with various drugs only had a transient
effect on her constipation. It seemed as if some unknown mecha nism forced
her gut-brain axis always back to its disturbed mode of communication. I
ordered a series of diagnostic evaluations, none of which revealed anything
that could explain her constipati on. Most interesting was the fact that, based
on a specialized  test called a colonic transit study , the time it took for
digestive waste to move through her colon was completely normal.
Dahlia was also convinced that her symptoms of anxiety , depression,
fatigue, and chronic pain were caused by fermenting toxic waste  products in
her intestinal tract, and that her inability to rid herself of these waste
products was having a major effect on her overall well-being. Many
physicians upon  encountering such a patient, with her constellation of
symptoms and her bizarre-sounding stories, would perform a colonoscopy ,
and provide a prescription for the newest laxative and a referral to a
psychiatrist. Today we know that such a strategy would ignore some
important biological factors in the patient’ s symptoms. It is likely that the
enemas Dahlia received as a young child interfered with the development of
a norma l gut microbial composition during her first years of life, resulting
in long-lasting changes in the way her gut microbes communicated with her
nervous system. Even though we still don’t have the scien ce to know
exactly what these early gut microbial changes are that lead to symptoms
like Dahlia’ s, her story strong ly suggests that changes in the normal
development of a healthy gut microbiome can put patients at risk of
developing psychiatric symptoms as well as a lifelong miscommunication
between the gut and the brain. I am convinced that in the future we will
have therapeutic strategies to reverse such early programming errors of the
gut-brain axis. Until then, a holistic treatment approach including a
combination of pharmacologic and behavioral treatments to deal with her
psychiatric symptoms, establishing a greater diversity of gut microbes
through probiotic ingestion and a diet high in plant-based fiber, and the
administration of herbal laxative s to stimulate fluid secretion in the colon is
likely to be beneficial. Such an approach will also help to validate the
patient’ s suffering and her unique story . In the case of Dahlia, this approach
was able not only to gradually improve her gastrointestinal symptoms, but
also to reduce her symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Over the years I’ve seen many patients with complex, seemingly
unexplainable symptoms, and one of the important lessons I’ve learned is to
listen to their stories in an unbiased way—no matter how odd they may
sound, and no matter how poorly they fit into current scientific dogma.
Medical student s are not taught  how to diagnose such patients,  so it would
be easy for even an experienced gastroenterologist to pass off Dahlia’ s
misguided assumptions as a psychological aberration with specifics unique
to her. But I suspect that in addition to the altered development of the gut
microbiota-brain communication , her routine was in part a remnant of the
ancient and all-too-enduring belief that toxic waste products accumulating
in the colon play a role in all kinds of diseases and ailments, both physical
and psychological, and that cleansing the colon is the essential remedy for
this. This belief, called intestinal putrefaction or autointoxication, is nearly
as old as papyru s, and its treatm ent was part of ancient healing traditions in
every corner of the world.
Gut Suspicions
In ancient Egypt and Mesopotam ia, people believed that rotting food in the
intestines forms  toxins, which then move through the body via the
circulatory syste m and cause fevers, resulting in disease. To heal such ills,
the Ebers Papyrus, an Egyptian  medical text from the fourtee nth century
B.C., provides directions for using an enema to treat more than twenty
different stomach and intestinal issues by “driving out excrements.” Ancient
Egyptians claimed that the god Thot had taught them about autointoxication
and about purifying the gut to avoid disease. This led the pharaoh to name
an appo intee known as “keeper of the rectum,” whose job was to manage
the royal enemas—one of history’ s first truly rough gigs.
Across the Red Sea in ancient Mesopotamia, Sumerians, mem bers of
the oldest known human civilization, also applied enemas to expel disease.
So did ancient Babylonians and Assyrians, whose tablets from  as early as
600 B.C. mention the use of enemas. Over in India, Susruta, the father of
Indian surgery, was specific in his recommendations, describing in Sanskrit
medical texts how to use syrin ges, bougies, and a rectal speculum. The
tradition continu ed with Ayurvedic practitioners: the most important of the
five detoxifying and cleansing Ayurvedic therapies was enemas to clear the
lower GI tract. Ayurvedic heale rs also commonly used niruha basti, a type
of medi cated enema, to treat a variety of ailments, including arthritis,
backache, const ipation, irritable  bowel syndrome, neurologica l disorders,
and obesity. And in East Asia, Chinese and Korean healers  were also
concerned with the dangers of an unclean bowel. They prescribed enemas
and colonic irrigation to manage the dangers of “internal dampness,” which
they believed could cause myriad problems, including high cholesterol,
chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, aller gies, and cancer .
The founders of Western medicine had other ideas about how
autointoxication affected the body, but they agreed that it was definitely not
good. The classi cal Greek physician Hippocrates, for whom the Hippocratic
Oath is named, documented using enemas to treat fevers and other bodily
disorders. Hippo crates is also credited with the profound statement that all
diseases start in the gut. Ancient Greeks adopted the Egyptia n idea that
rotting food inside us leads to disease-causing toxins, which brought about
the idea of the four humors that had to be balanced to maintain  health—an
idea that held throughout the Middle Ages.
Why have humans been so obsessed for so long with the dangers
lurking inside our guts? Many patients from different ethnic, educational,
and socioeconom ic backgrounds whom I see in my clinic stron gly believe
in this idea as well. They come convinced that some ill-defined and largely
scientifically unsubstantiated processes in their GI tract are responsible for
various digestive  and other health problems. Over  the years, such suspected
processes have included candida yeast infections of the intesti ne, allergies
and hypersensitivities to all kinds of dietary components, leakiness of the
gut, and most recently , a perceived imbalance of their gut microbiota. Many
of these individuals have embarked on often costly and cumbersome
routines to combat these suspected ailments, including highly restrictive
diets, supplements, and even antibiotics. The fact that they still come to my
clinic with unabated digestive problems makes me wonder if any of the
treatments they’ ve tried have really done any good, or if they have at most
simply relieved the patients’  anxieties.
Humans have used all kinds of nonscientific explanations and rituals to
reduce their fear and anxiety over health threats outside their control.
Dietary cleansing rituals have been particularly popular , including juicing
and special diets aimed to achieve a clean gut, a contradiction in itself.
Today , these basic anxieties have been whipped up dramatically by the
endless stream of stories from popular authors in popular publications—
stories that make shifting claims about the ever-present dangers contained
in what we eat. On the other hand, we now know from scientific  studies that
there is some validity to the fear of microbes in our gut and of the many
substances they can produce. Just as there are criminals, scammers, and
computer hackers in human society , there are microbes that don’t play by
the rules. Some of these transient microor ganisms, in particular parasites
and viruses, have their own agen da (usually procreation), and they ignore or
even sabotage our health and wellness as they pursue it. They have learned
to hack into our most sophisticated computer system, the brain, to use its
emotional operating programs for their own selfish benefits.
To demonstrate how sophisticate d these microbes can be, let me share a
fascinating story  that I first heard some fifteen years ago at a meeting of
psychiatrists in San Francisco. There, Robert Sapolsky , a leading expert on
the ill effects of chronic stress on our brain, gave an inspiring talk about an
evil but clever microor ganism named Toxoplasma gondii. In the talk, he
described work published in 2000 by Manuel Berdoy and his research
group at Oxford  University . That study showed that T. gondi i has its own
agenda of survival and reprod uction, which it pursues in a remarkably
cunning and egotistical fashion.
While toxoplasma can reproduce in one place only—the gastrointestinal
tract of infected  cats—the parasite can actually infiltrate the brain of any
mammal (including humans), by outsmarting the blood-brain barrier , which
functions as a firewall to isolate and protect the brain from any unwanted
influences. Once cats are infected, they then dispel this microor ganism in
their excrement. Thus gynecologists recommend that pregnant women keep
cats and their litter boxes out of the house, and refrain from gardening in
areas where cats may bury their feces in the ground. In toxoplasma’ s ideal
world, cats excrete the parasite , and rodents subsequently ingest it. The
parasite then forms round cysts throughout the rodent’ s body , and, in
particular , in its brain. A cat in turn eats the infected rodent. The ingested
cysts reproduce  in the cat’s gastrointestinal tract, the cat sheds newly
hatched parasites in its feces, and the cycle of life continues.
Here is where the plot takes  a fascinating turn, attesting to the
remarkable cleverness of this microbe. Under normal circumstances, a
pathogen from an infected rat would be very unlikely to wind up back in a
cat because rodents instinctively avoid cats. But toxoplasma-infected
rodents not only lose their instinctive fear of cats—they also begin to prefer
areas that smell like cat urine.
To make this happen, the parasite’ s tiny cysts home into a specific
region of the rat’s brain with the accuracy of a cruise missile, and with
minimal collateral damage. The target is the emotional operating system
responsible for triggering the fear-and-flight response. This emotional and
motor program normally causes the rats to flee at the first whiff of a nearby
cat, but the parasite specifically eliminates rats’ fear of cats. Infected rats
continue to exhibit their normal  defensive behaviors toward predators other
than cats, and they perform normally on laboratory tests of memory ,
anxiety , fear, and social behavior . But when it comes to cats, the cysts don’t
stop there. They also boost activity in nearby brain circuits that control
sexual attraction, causing toxoplasma-infected rats that smell cats to
become sexually attracted to them. This clever hijacking of the rat brain’ s
operating systems overwhelms the innate fear response by causing a sexual
attraction to cat odor. In other words, the infected rats develop a fatal
attraction to cats.
The evolutionar y intelligence behind these strategies is remarkable.
Pharmaceutical companies have spent billions of dollars to develop
medications designed to perform the same tasks that toxoplasma
accomplishes with such ease. Most of these investments have failed. For
example, compo unds developed  to attenuate the fear response  in anxiety
disorders and to block the action of CRF, a molecule involved in the stress
response, and compounds designed to boost libido in women with
hypoactive sexual desire disorder have proven marginally effective, and
they come with potentially serious side ef fects.
There are many other microbes that have developed astonishingly
sophisticated ways of manipulating the host animal’ s behavior . When the
rabies virus causes its host—such as a dog, fox, or bat—to become
aggressive, it does so by infiltra ting a specific brain circuit responsible for
anger and aggression. This increases the chance of the infected animal
attacking and biting another animal (or human), thereby transferring the
virus contained  in its saliva into the wounds of the victim. While the
toxoplasma parasite and the rabies virus stand out in terms of the highly
specialized knowledge of their host animals’  nervous system, many other
disease-causing microbes, including bacteria, protozoa, and viruses, have
developed surprising and cleve r ways to manipulate the behavior of their
host animals.
If a hacker had manipulated a company’ s computer system the way the
toxoplasma parasite and the rabies virus manipulate the brain, we’d suspect
that the infiltrat or was a skilled hacker with in-depth knowl edge of the
system’ s code, and that he had perpetrated an inside job. Toxoplasma and
rabies have evolved to understand the ins and outs of the mammalian brain-
gut axis, and they have a detailed knowledge of mammalian emotional
operating systems—and can manipulate them to achieve their goals.
However , parasites and viruse s are not the only microbes with a
remarkable ability to influence our brain. Over the last decade, researchers
have found that some of the microbes living peacefully in our gut have
equally impressi ve skills, though they don’t use these skills against us. But
still, their ef fects on the brain-gut axis are profound.
Do Microbes Mediate Gut-Brain Communication?
Just a few years ago, many of us studying brain-gut interactions thought we
had identified all the essential components that contributed to bidirectional
brain-gut-brain communication.
We knew  about many of the ways the gut keeps tabs on digestion and on
our environment: how it senses heat, cold, pain, stretch, acidity , nutrients in
food, and other characteristics— so many , in fact, that our intestinal surface
is arguably the largest and most  sophisticated sensory system in our bodies.
It seeme d clear that those gut sensations were relayed to our little brain and
big brain through the action of hormones, signaling molecules  of immune
cells, and sensory nerves, especially the vagus nerve. This new knowledge
explained why our digestive system functions perfectly and without our
awareness most of the time, why the gut reacts the way it does to a tainted
meal, and why we feel good after a delicious meal.
We also knew that in managing digestion, the enteric nervous system—
the little brain in your gut—act s as a local regulatory agency that stays in
constant close contact with the federal authority , your brain,  in case of
emer gencies. We had learned that when we experience emotions,
specialized emotional operating programs in the brain create distinct
dramatic plots that play out in our guts, causing a characteristic pattern of
gut contractions, blood flow, and the secretion of vital digestiv e fluids for
each emotion.
The clinicians among us were satisfied with our new knowledge  that the
disturbed communication between brain and gut plays a promi nent role in
functional gut disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome. And contrary to
the view of the great majority of psychiatrists and most of my
gastroenterology colleagues, I suspected early on that modifica tions in this
communication system might even be involved in such nondigestive
disorders as anxiety , depression, and autism.
Still, as happens often in science, our initial confidence turned out to be
premature. Though we had uncovered much about bidirectional
communications between the gut and the brain, it was becoming apparent
that our bodies actually organiz e gut reactions and gut feelings  in the form
of an elaborate brain-gut circui try that includes the gut microbiota as an
essential component. We had come to our earlier conclusions and made our
predictions without taking into account this crucial role of the gut
microbiota.
As it turns out, our emotionally triggered gut reactions do not remain
tied up in the twists and spasms of our gut. They also trigger a myriad of
gut sensations, which then travel back to our brain, where they can
modulate or create gut feelings, and where they are stored as emotional
memories of a particular experi ence. And we have realized only in the last
few years—to the surprise of scientists around the world—that our gut
microbes play an integral role in this interaction between gut reactions and
sensations.
As we now understand it, this mass of invisible life can comm unicate
constantly with our brains throu gh a variety of signals, including  hormones,
neurotransmitters, and myriad small compounds called metabolites. These
metabolites are the result of the microbes’  peculiar eating habits and are
produced when they feed on the indigestible leftovers of what we consume,
on bile acids secreted by the liver into the gut, or on the mucus layer
covering your intestine. In fact, in the conversation between the gut and the
brain, your gut microbiota engage in an extensive running dialogue, using a
sophisticated biochemical language I’ll call “microbe-speak.”
Why do our gut microbes and our brains need such a sophisticated
communication system? How did microbe-speak develop? To answer these
questions, I need to take you back in time—far back, to the earth’ s
primeval, microbe-rich oceans.
The Dawn of Microbe-Speak
Approximately four billion years ago, life first appeared on earth in the
form of single-celled microor ganisms, the archaea. For the first three billion
years of their existence, microbes were the sole living inhabi tants of the
planet. And there were trillions of them, more numerous than the stars in
our galaxy . They floated in a silent but massive marine-based universe,
packed with close to a billion different species of invisible microbes of
different shapes, colors, and behaviors.
Over this vast stretch of time, through the trial and error of natural
selection, these microbes gradually perfected the ability to communicate
with each other . To accomplish this, they manufactured signaling molecules
to send signals, along with receptor molecules to serve as specific decoding
mechanisms for these signals. In this way, signaling molecules released by
one microbe could be decoded by another one nearby . And this signaling
actually triggers  a transient or persistent change in behavior in the receiving
microbe. As Jesse Roth and Derek LeRoith discovered, many of these
signaling molecules closely resemble the hormones and neurotransmitters
that your gut uses today to communicate with your enteric nervous system
and brain. Together you can think of these molecules as an ancient and
relatively simpl e language—ju st like the various biological signaling
dialects that dif ferent or gan systems in your body use today .
About 500 million years ago, the first primitive multicellular  marine
animals began to evolve in the ocean, and some marine microbes took up
residence inside  their digestive systems. One of those tiny marine animals
—the hydra—can still be found today in bodies of fresh water . This creature
is little more than a floating digestive tract. It’s a tube a few millimeters
long, with a mouth at one end, a digestive system filled with microbes
running down its length, and an adhesive disk at the other end to anchor the
animal to a rock or underwater plant.
Gradually , the animals and microbes developed a symbiotic
relationship, and the microbes found ways to transfer vital genetic
information to their host anim als. This information provided the host
animals with a range of molecules that they were lacking, but which the
microbes had learned to manuf acture during billions of years of trial and
error . Some of these molecules became the neurotransmitters, hormones,
gut peptides, cytokines, and other types of signaling molecules our bodies
use today .
Over millions of years, as prim itive marine animals evolved into more
complex creatures, they developed simple nervous systems in the form of
nerve networks surrounding their primitive guts, not very different from the
networks of the enteric nervous system that surround our guts today . The
nerve networks in these creatures used some of the genetic instructions they
received from the microbes to produce signaling chemicals, which allowed
neurons to pass messages to each other and instruct muscle cells to contract.
These were the precursors of our human neurotransmitters.
Amazingly , these simple nerve networks and their signaling molecules
enabled the primitive animals  of millions of years ago to respond to
ingested food in a similar , programmed way as our guts do today . When
they consumed food, they engaged in stereotypic movements equivalent to
those of the human digestive tract: a series of reflexes that propelled
ingested food from the esophagus through the stomach and upper intestine,
and that helped to excrete unwanted intestinal contents. When these animals
consumed toxins, they were able to expel them from either or both ends of
their GI tract, the human equiva lent of the vomiting and diarrhe a associated
with food poisoning. These early marine animals also contained cells that
could secrete certain chemicals to help trigger their digestive reflex. These
secretory cells may well be the ancestors of our enteroendocrine cells, the
specialized cells in the gut that produce most of the body’ s serotonin and
the gut hormones that make you feel hungry or full.
The new symbiosis between the tiny marine creatures and their resident
microbes led to many benefits for both of them. The animals gained the
ability to digest certain foods, obtain vitamins that they couldn’ t synthesize
themselves, and evade or expel toxins and other dangers in their
environment. The microbes in their digestive systems gained a contained,
convenient environment in whic h they could thrive, and free transport from
one location to another . That collection of microbes can be viewed as the
earliest version of the gut microbiota in your intestines.
This symbiotic relationship betw een gut microbes and their hosts turned
out to be so beneficial for both partners that it has been conserved in
virtually every living multicel lular animal on earth today , from ants,
termites, and bees to cows, elephants, and humans. The fact that these basic
digestive activit ies have persisted through hundreds of millions of years
attests to the remarkable evolutionary intelligence that has been
programmed into your gut and its enteric nervous system. It also makes it
understandable why there is such an intricate relationship between our
microbes, the gut, and the brain.
As more complex types of animals evolved, primitive nervous systems
grew into a more elaborate network of nerves outside the diges tive system.
This network was separate from—yet still intimately connected with—the
enteric nervous system, and it retained most of the signaling mechanisms.
The elaborate new nerve network eventually developed into a central
nervous system, which established its headquarters inside the cranium.
Gradually , central nervous systems took over management of behaviors
related to the outside world that had originally been handled exclusively by
the enteric nervous system, including the ability to approach or withdraw
from other animals as circumstances warranted. These functions were
eventually trans ferred to emotion-regulating regions of the brain, while the
enteric nervous  system itself was left in charge of the basic digestive
functions, a division of labor that has persisted in our own gut-brain axis.
It’s been hundreds of millions of years since a handful of microbes
made initial contact with the primitive gut of a simple marine animal. But
the long evolutio nary journey that we’ve taken since then helps explain why
today your own gut, including its enteric nervous system and its
microbiome, continues to have such a powerful influence on your emotions
and your overall well-being.
An Ancient Binding Contract
Take a moment  now to ponder  the wonders of your gut microbiota. This
collection of some one thousand  species of microbes comprises 1,000 times
more cells than exist in your brain and spinal cord, and ten times more than
the number of human cells in your entire body . Together , the gut microbiota
weigh about as much as your liver, and more than your brain or your heart.
This has led some people to refer to the gut microbiota as a newly
discovered or gan, one that rivals the complexity of your brain.
The vast majority of gut microb es are not only harmless, but are in fact
beneficial for our health and well-being; these are referred to by scientists
as symbionts or commensals. The symbionts obtain nutrients  from their
hosts, and in exchange they help keep the gut in balance and defend against
intruders. But there is a small  number of potentially harmful microbes,
called pathobionts, that reside in your gut as well. Under certain conditions,
these untrustworthy microbes can turn their weapons against us.
Pathobionts have molecular tools that serve as artillery for attacking your
gut lining, causing inflammatio n of the lining or ulcers. This change of
loyalty can be a consequence of changes in diet, antibiotic treatment, or
severe stress, and it results in the abnormal accumulation or increased
virulence of certain populations of bacteria, thereby transforming former
symbionts into pathobionts.
Yet human gut microbes rarely resort to such aggressive tactics. Instead,
they usually live in harmony with us, minding their own affairs, which
include digestio n, growth, and reproduction. Nor does our immune system
turn its formidab le weapons on gut microbiota. The simple reason is that the
costs to both sides greatly outweigh the benefits. Instead, both sides provide
services for the other . It’s an ancient binding contract that functions as both
a peace treaty and a trade agreement, ensuring substantial reciprocal
benefits to all involved.
The symbiosis between the microbes and their hosts that developed in
its simplest form millions of years ago continues in our bodies today .
Microbes gain by being able to live a privileged life in our intestines, which
comes with a constant supply of food, moderate temperatures, and
unlimited free travel. They also gain a free connection to our internal
Internet traffic—the constant flow of information transmitted by hormones,
gut peptides, nerve impulses, and other chemical signals. This information
allows them to keep track of our emotional states, our stress levels, whether
we are asleep or awake, and which environmental conditions we are
exposed to. Having access to this private information helps the microbes to
adjust production of their metabolites not only to ensure optimal living
conditions for themselves, but also to stay in harmony with our gut
environment.
In exchange, the microbes provide us with essential vitamins,
metabolize digestive compounds, called bile acids, that are produced by the
liver, and detoxify foreign chemicals that our bodies have never
experienced—so-called xenobio tics. Most important, they digest dietary
fiber and complex sugar molecules that our digestive system can’t break
down or absorb on its own, and thus provide us with a substantial number
of additional calories that we would otherwise lose in our stool. In
prehistoric times, when people were more concerned with hunting and
gathering enough food to eat than fitting into their skinny jeans, the extra
calories that gut microbiota extracted from food helped them survive. But
today , as we’re awash in excess food and obesity is epidemic, the extra
calories that gut microbes provide have become a liability .
Respecting the key points of this ancient binding contract has produced
a remarkably peaceful and mutually beneficial coexistence between
microbes and hosts that has persisted for millions of years. It is an
astonishing accomplishment—we humans are light-years away from such a
track record of harmony .
Microbe-Speak and Your Internal Internet
Your gut microbes are engaged in ongoing conversations with your GI tract,
your immune system, your enteric nervous system, and your brain—and as
with any cooperative relationship, healthy communication is essential.
Recent research reveals that the disturbance of these conversations can lead
to GI diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease and antibiotic-
associated diarrh ea, and obesity , with all its deleterious consequences, and
may be involved in the deve lopment of many serious brain diseases,
including depression, Alzheimer ’s disease, and autism.
The communication with the brain occurs in several parallel “channels”
that use differen t modes of transmission. This includes molecules that can
communicate with the brain as inflammatory signals, travel through the
blood like hormones, or reach  the brain in the form of nerve signals.
Communication through these channels does not occur in isolation; as we
will see, there is extensive cross talk between them. Your gut microbes can
listen in on your brain’ s ongoing conversation and vice versa, and
information flow through the biological channels that your gut microbes use
to communicate with your brain is highly dynamic.
The amount of information that is allowed to travel through this system
depends in large part on the thickness and integrity of the thin mucus layer
lining the gut surface, the permeability of your gut wall (its leakiness), and
the blood-brain barrier . Normall y, these barriers are relatively tight, and the
flow of infor mation from gut microbes to the brain is restricted. But stress,
inflammation, a high-fat diet, and certain food additives can make these
natural barriers leakier .
To fully grasp what your microbes are doing inside you, for the moment
consider the various microbial communication channels together as a
conduit of information akin to the fiber optic line or cable that supplies your
home with Internet service. The amount of information being transmitted
through this conduit varies. At some moments, the microbes will be
uploading relativ ely small “text documents,” and the amount of transmitted
information will be small; but at other moments, they’ll be uploading a
series of huge, information-dense video clips.
However , there are ways that this communication system works
differently from  your home broadband service. The service contract with
your Internet provider caps the amount of information you can upload or
download per second. In other words, you have a fixed bandwidth,
depending on whether you signed up for the cheaper economy plan or the
more expensive  deluxe plan. The Internet connection between your gut
microbes and your brain, in contrast, is highly dynamic, as if you had the
economy plan for most of the time, but quickly switch to the deluxe plan
when you are stressed—say , after you had dinner in a French restaurant that
included an appetizer of foie gras and a filet of sole sautéed in lots of butter .
As we turn to the communication channels of microbe-speak, let’s start by
looking at the role of the immune system in the gut microbial signaling to
the brain . There are several ways by which this microbe-immune system-
brain dialogue can take place, and the consequences of altered interactions
between the gut microbe and immune system have receive d a lot of
attention recent ly, as disturbances in this complex dialogue have been
implicated in many brain diseases.
One means of communication involves specialized immune cells known
as dendr itic cells, located just under the inner lining of the gut. Dendritic
cells have “tentacles” that extend into the gut’s interior , where they can
communicate directly with the group of gut microbes that live near the gut
wall. These immune cell sensors are a first line of detection. Under normal
conditions, receptors on these cell parts—so-called pattern recognition or
toll-like receptors (TLRs)—recognize various signals from benign
microbes, assuri ng the immune system that all is well and that no defensive
response is necessary . Our immune cells have learned to correc tly interpret
these peace signals from interactions with a large variety of gut microbes
early in life. In contrast, when harmful or potentially dangerous bacteria are
detected through these mechanisms, they trigger an innate immune response
—a cascade of inflammatory reactions in the gut wall—t o keep the
pathogens in check.
Recent studies have shown that the mucus protecting the gut surface is
produced by specialized cells in the gut wall and is organized into two
layers: a thin, inner layer that firmly sticks to the cells of the gut wall and an
outer , thicker , and nonattached layer . Together these two transparent layers
are nearly invisible to the huma n eye, measuring only 150 microns across,
or about one and a half times the thickness of a human hair. The inner
mucus layer is dense and does not allow bacteria to penetrate, thus keeping
the epithelial cell surface free from bacteria. In contrast, the outer layer is
home to the majority of your gut microbes as well as complex sugar
molecules called mucins, which serve as an important source of nutrients
for the microbes, especially when you fast or you have less fiber in your
diet.
When microbes penetrate the protective mucus layer that covers the
lining of the gut, the molecules  of their cell walls trigger the activation of
immune cells beneath the gut lining, which then tailor the immune response
depending on whether , or to what degree, the microbe poses a danger . One
such molecule—lipopolysacchar ide, or LPS—is of particular importance in
this microbe-immune system dialogue. LPS, a component of the cell wall of
certain microbes called gram-negative organisms, is able to increase the
leakiness of the gut, thereby facilitating the transfer of microbes to the
immune system.
In contrast to common belief, no gut infection with a nasty bacte rium or
virus is required to trigger such responses of the immune system. People
eating a high animal fat diet have an increase in the relative abundance of
such gram-negative bacteria in their gut, or Firmicutes and Proteobacteria,
and are therefore more likely to chronically engage this immune activation
mechanism. And when inflammation, stress, or excessive dietary fat has
compromised the two natural barriers that keep us separated from the
trillions of microor ganisms in our gut lumen, the gut microbes or their
signaling molecules can cross the gut lining in greater numbers, causing
even greater engagement of the gut-based immune system, an inflammatory
process that can spread througho ut the body . This process has been referred
to as metabolic toxemia.
No matter how the gut’s immun e system detects microbes, it responds
by producing a number of molecules called cytokines. Under certain
circumstances, these cytokines can cause local full-blown inflammation of
the gut, as happens in inflammatory bowel disease or in acute
gastroenteritis. But once the cytokines are generated in the gut, these signals
can also be sent to the brain. For example, they can bind to receptors on
sensory nerve terminals of the vagus nerve, the gut-brain information
highway , and send long-distance messages into vital regions in the brain
that can reduce your energy level, increase feelings of fatigu e and pain
sensitivity , and even make you feel depressed. And with milder degrees of
vagal inflammation, the sensitivity of vagal nerve terminals to satiety
signals decreases, compromising the normal mechanism that stops you from
eating after a full meal. Interference with this mechanism is often a problem
for patients with high dietary fat consumption.
Alternatively , cytokines may spill into the bloodstream, travel to the
brain like a hormone, transverse the blood-brain barrier , and activate
immune cells— called microglial cells—inside the brain. As the majority of
cells in our brains are microglial cells, which respond to cytokines, this
makes the brain a receptive target of gut-microbial-immune system
signaling. Such long-distance immune signaling from the gut to the brain
has been  implicated in the development of neurodegenerative diseases such
as Alzheimer ’s.
In addition to their elaborate ways of communicating with our immune
system, microbe s also use their metabolites to communicate with your brain
in ways that are less dramatic, yet equally vital. Gut microbes are highly
diverse and numerous—there are 360 microbial genes in the gut for every
human gene—a nd can digest substances that we cannot. This produces
several hundred thousand different metabolites, many that our digestive
system doesn’ t produce itself. A large number of these  microbial
metabolites make it into the bloodstream, where they account for nearly 40
percent of all circulating molecules. Many are considered neuroactive,
which means they can interact with our nervous system. The large intestine
absorbs some of these metaboli tes, transferring them into the bloodstream,
and more make it into the bloodstream if you have a leaky gut. Once in the
circulation, the metabolites can then travel to many organs in your body ,
including the brain, as a hormone does.
Another important way microbi al metabolites signal the brain is via the
serotonin-packed enterochromaf fin cells in your gut wall. These cells are
studded with receptors that detect a variety of microbial metabolites,
including bile-acid metabolites, and short-chain fatty acids, such as
butyrate, that come from whole-grain cereal, asparagus, or your favorite
vegetable dish. Some of these metabolites can increase the production of
serotonin in enterochromaf fin cells, making more of this molecu le available
for signaling to the brain via the vagus nerve. They can also alter your
sleep, pain sensitivity , and overall well-being. In animal experiments, they
were shown to influence the development of anxiety-like and social
behaviors. And they may play a role in how good you feel after a healthy
meal rich in fruits, whole grains, and vegetables, or how bad you feel after
eating too many greasy potato chips or a basket of deep-fried chicken.
Millions of Conversations Within
What makes the role of the gut microbiota so intriguing and far-reaching is
the fact that this mass of microbes is sitting right at the interface that
separates our gut reactions and our gut sensations. Depending on the type of
meal you just ate, or whether your gut is completely empty , the enteric
nervous system  alters the gut environment and manages digestion by
controlling the acidity , fluidity , secretions of digestive fluids, and
mechanical contractions of your GI tract. Thus gut microbes constantly
adapt to regional shifts in acidity , secretion of vital digestive fluids,
available nutrients, and how much time they have to digest them before
they’re excreted . Likewise, when stress or high anxiety causes the brain’ s
emotional operating programs to create dramatic plots that play out in our
guts, it alters gut contractions, rates of transit from the stomach to the large
intestine, and blood flow. This can dramatically alter living conditions for
microbes in the small and large intestine, and is probably one of the reasons
why the composition of your gut microbes is altered durin g stress. In
contrast, when you feel depressed and everything in your gut slows down,
microbes sense these changes and activate genes that help them adapt to
those shifting conditions.
Meanwhile, the digestive, immune, and nervous tissues are busy
communicating with each other , using signaling molecules that include gut
peptides, cytokines, and neurotransmitters. Crucially , all of these substances
are elem ents of biochemical languages that, thanks to our long, shared
evolutionary history , are actually distant dialects of “microbe-speak.”
As we scientists got over our initial surprise at the pivotal role of gut
microbes in brain-gut communication, and as we investigated this
relationship further over the last few years, it became ever clearer that the
brain, the gut, and the microbiome are all in constant, close communication.
We began thinking of the brain, the gut, and the microbiome as parts of a
single integrated system, with plenty of cross talk and feedbac k from one
part to another . I refer to this system throughout the book as the brain-gut-
microbiome axis.
For the entire twentieth century , scientists could not see our microbial
partners becaus e the great majority of them could not be grown in the
laboratory . Until the advent of automated gene-sequencing techniques to
identify classes of microbes and supercomputers to process the massive
microbial data, we had no way of conducting extensive surveys to
determine which microbes were there, which genes they collectively
possessed, and which metabolites they produced. More specific ally, we had
only limited understanding of how the various players in the brain-gut-
microbiome axis communicate with each other .
It’s now clear that our gut microbes have more than just a privileged
role in our body . As the promi nent microbiome expert David Relman, of
Stanford University , expressed it, “The human microbiota is a fundamental
component of what it means to be human.” In additio n to their
indispensable role in helping us digest large parts of our diet, it is becoming
clear that gut microbes have an extensive and wholly unexpected influence
on the appetite- control systems and emotional operating systems in our
brain, on our behavior , and even on our minds. These invisible creatures in
our digestive system have a word to say when it comes to how we feel, how
we make our gut-based decisions, and how our brain develops and ages.
PART 2
INTUITION AND GUT FEELINGS
CHAPTER
5
UNHEALTHY MEMORIES: THE EFFECTS OF
EARLY LIFE EXPERIENCES ON THE GUT-
BRAIN DIALOGUE
It makes intuitive sense that growing up in a harmonious, protected family
environment has a positive effect on a person’ s development. Parents all
over the world strive to provide such an optimal setting for their children.
But ever since the advent of psychoanalysis, we know that certain
repressed, adve rse childhood experiences can result in psychological
problems later in life. Most of the time, such childhood experiences are out
of the control of the parents. In her bestselling book The Drama of the
Gifted Child, psycho logist Alice Miller maintained nearly forty years ago
that all instances of mental illness had their developmental origin in
unresolved, subconscious childhood trauma, which could be physical or
psychological in nature. Even though I was fascinated when reading
Miller ’s book during my medical training in the early 1980s, it took me
more than twenty years to realize that the connection between early adverse
life events and adult health outcomes laid out in her book not only were
relevant to the development of behavioral and psychological problems such
as depression, anxiety , and addiction, but also might be relevant to the
medical problems of my patients, in particular those with chronic
gastrointestinal disorders.
Today , exploring a patient’ s first eighteen years has become an essential
part of any medical history I take. And it turns out it is a very simple thing
to do; it doesn ’t require a specialized psychoanalytical training, and it
doesn’ t take much time. In many patients I often get more important clues
about their illness from exploring early life experiences than from asking in
great length about the details of their medical symptoms. I always ask my
patients the simple question, “Do you think you had a happy childhood?”
What is most remarkable is the fact that asking this question, and without
any additional probing, I usuall y get an honest account of what traumatic
experiences patients remember from their first eighteen years of life. Most
of the time the patient had not made a connection between such experiences
and their current medical problem. Also, as I have learned over the years,
their answers reveal a lot about the origin and nature of the stomach
problems they experience as adults.
More than half of my patients over the years have told me of family
trouble while they were growing up. One of their parents may have been ill,
or there was an acrimonious divorce followed by a prolonged custody
dispute, or perhaps, in more extreme cases, a close family member suffered
from alcoholism or drug addiction. Some confide in me that as a child they
experienced verbal, physical, or sexual abuse from a parent or stranger .
Several years ago, a thirty-five-y ear-old woman named Jennifer  came to
see me. “I’ve been suffering from belly pain all my life, but it’s gotten a lot
worse this past year,” she said. To better understand the nature of her
abdominal pain, I asked about her bowel movements. She said some days
she had to run to the restroom all the time, while at other times she’d be
constipated and couldn’ t go for days. Her pain was worse on the days she
had diarrhea, and her bowel movements would temporarily relieve it. As we
talked, it became clear that Jennifer had been suffering emotion ally as well.
Since her early teens, she said, she had suffered from anxiety with
accompanying panic attacks, and from recurrent bouts of depression.
Jennifer had seen several other specialists, including two
gastroenterologists and a psychi atrist, and had under gone the usual battery
of diagnostic tests, including endoscopies of the upper and lower digestive
tract and a CT scan of her belly . None of the tests showed anything wrong.
“The last two doctors I saw told me that there was nothing seriously wrong
with me and implied that it was all in my head,” she said.
Jennifer ’s docto rs had prescribed the typical drug cocktail for such
unexplainable brain-gut symptoms: the antidepressant Celexa and the acid-
suppressing medication Prilosec . But they had also told her that she would
have to learn to live with her symptoms, and that there was nothing more
they could do for her. “I have almost completely lost my faith in the
medical profession,” she told me.
Doctors general ly spend much more time asking patients about the
details of their bowel habits and checking blood pressure and cholesterol
levels than they do exploring their risk factors related to early life
experiences. Yet a recent study of close to 54,000 randomly selected
Americans showed that children or teenagers who experience adverse
events have a higher likelihood of suffering from poor health, a heart attack,
stroke, asthma, and diabetes as adults. The risk for such negative adult
health outcomes increased with the number of adverse experiences
participants endured before the age eighteen. An earlier analysis of health
records of a large health maintenance organization, in the Adverse
Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study , had reported simila r findings,
including a 4–12 fold increase in the risk for alcoholism, depression, and
substance abuse and a 2–4 fold reduction in self-rated health. The
questionnaire used in both studies, the ACE questionnaire, asked
participants about traumatic events experienced in childhoo d—such as
sexual, physical, and emotional abuse—as well as more general household
dysfunction related to the parents. The majority of these questio ns explored
situations in which the stabil ity in the family was disrupted and the
nurturing interaction between the primary caregiver and child was
compromised. Other studies have shown that the well-known association of
poverty with poorer health outco mes is primarily linked to the health effects
of the chronic stress that comes from living in a low socioeconomic status.
While the connection between a wide range of traumatic or unstable
upbringings and negative health  outcomes makes intuitive sense, it is only
in the last thirty years that scien ce has unraveled the biological mechanisms
that are respons ible for this connection, opening up windows for reversing
the detrimental effects of this early life programming. These scientific
insights are not only stunning, but have far-reaching implicati ons for our
health. If more doctors were aware of these connections and took the time
to ask their patients about their childhoods, they could uncover important
risk factors and possibly even devise more effective integrative treatment
plans to help them.
During my consultation with Jennifer , I asked her why she had been put
on the antidepre ssant medication  Celexa several years ago. We talked about
her depression and anxiety . “It has nothing to do with my stomach pain,”
she insisted. I did not try to chan ge her opinion on this sensitive  subject, but
I continued gently probing for factors that I suspected might underlie both
her chronic digestive symptoms and her psychological symptoms.
“Do you think you had a happy childhood?” I asked her. Almost
miraculously , the question unlocked a storybook of stressful tales. When
Jennifer was still in the womb,  her maternal grandmother was diagnosed
with breast cancer , and the crisis distressed her pregnant mother . She
witnessed her parents argue and fight for years when she was a girl, and
they split in a bitter divorce when she was eight. Jennifer was not the only
one in her family who had strug gled with symptoms of depression and gut
problems. Both her mother and grandmother had suffered from depression
and anxiety on and off through their lives, and she remembers that they
always complained about their “stomach issues.” Jennifer ’s history tipped
me off about the possible roots of both her brain and GI symptoms—and
gave me confidence that I’d be able to help her .
Like many patients, Jennifer had never considered that her range of
physical and emotional symptom s might be connected, that they might be
tied to her stressful early life experiences, or that these expe riences had
programmed the interactions of her brain, the gut, and its microbes in a
unhealthy way. But a growing body of science suggests that it’s past time to
integrate this idea into modern medical practice.
Programmed for Stress
In the spring of 2002, at a small scientific conference in Sedona, Arizona,
two strong-minded physicians offered clashing views about the cause of
stress-related disorders. I had co-or ganized the conference with Charles
Nemerof f, a prominent psychiat rist then at Emory University , to explore the
role of early life trauma in a range of chronic medical and psychiatric
diseases . Sedona’ s secluded setting amid stunning red-rock wilderness
helped lure leading researchers and practitioners from across North
America.
On the second day of the conference, the well-known Canadian
psychoanalyst and abdominal surgeon Ghislain Devroede took to the
podium. Devroe de specialized in treating patients who had suffered sexual
abuse as children; he used psychoanalysis to surface their repressed pain
and shame. Without such treatment, he maintained, the repressed emotion is
buried in the body, causing physical symptoms. Then he told stories of
patients with pelvic pain and intestinal disorders like chronic constipation
he had treated, whose symptoms disappeared after they underwent
psychoanalysis and faced their dif ficult pasts.
But Nemerof f, who had made his reputation studying the biological
basis of major psychiatric disor ders, was having none of it. He challenged
Devroede. “We’ve learned that psychoanalysis is not very effective to treat
the mental and physical consequences of early life trauma.” The room grew
tense. No amount of psychoanalysis would ever reverse the trace in
patients’  brains of early abuse, Nemerof f claimed. Most of the participants
we’d invited agreed on this point. We no longer had to wonder about murky
Freudian ideas about early sexuality or neuroses to help our patients heal.
Instead, science had shifted our thinking. We now have solid evidence
that stressful experiences in early life, including a compromised interaction
between the primary caregiver and his or her child, can leave lasting traces
on his or her offspring’ s brain. We also know from extensive surveys in
human populations that these changes can drive the development of stress-
sensitive disorde rs such as depre ssion and anxiety , and that they might also
play a role in gastrointestinal pain syndromes like IBS. But questionnaire
data and psychological theor ies are not sufficient to help affected
individuals. In order to develop  novel therapies aimed to rever se this early
programming in patients, we needed to know how our earliest experiences
alter specific neural circuits in our brains that underlie our response to a
variety of stressful situations. This knowledge could only be gained from
basic studies performed in animal models of early life adversity .
A breakthrough in our understanding began when psychiatry researchers
in the 1980s realized that stress exerts the same biological  effects on
animals like rats, mice, and monkeys as it does in humans. A major focus of
these animal studies was on the role of the interactions between  the mother
and her offspring, as such interactions were easier to model in the
laboratory , compared to such uniquely human behaviors as verbal and
emotional abuse, or marital discord.
For example, rodents, like people, have different temperaments: some
are timid, others are social; some are intrepid explorers, others stick close to
home. And some rat mothers—even genetically identical animals—are
better than others at nurturing their offspring. A nurturing rat mom pampers
her pups. She hovers over them with her back conspicuously  arched and
legs splayed outward, allowing them to switch nipples, and she spends a lot
of time licking and grooming them. A more negligent rat mom lazes on her
side or lies on top of her pups as they struggle to nurse. This keeps them
from switching nipples or wiggling, both of which are good for infant rats.
In landmark experiments that began in the late 1980s, Michael Meaney ,
a neuro scientist at McGill University , in Montreal, studie d how the
interactions between rat moms and pups played out in the lives of the pups.
His research team took genetically identical rat mothers and videotaped and
analyzed their behaviors while the pups were infants. Then they let the pups
grow up, and checked how the pups of nurturing rat moms fared compared
with the of fspring of stressed-out moms.
The pampered pups grew into adults that were more laid-ba ck, less
reactive to stress, and less prone to addictive behaviors, such as overdoing it
when given a free supply of alcohol or cocaine. They were also more social
with other rats, more daring, and more willing to explore new places. Pups
of stressed, negligent moms grew into loners prone to the rat equivalents of
anxiety , depress ion, and addictive behaviors. Studies of monkey moms and
their infants turned up similar  results. Stressed macaque infants whose
moms are inconsistent, erratic, and sometimes dismissive grow up timid,
submissive, fearful, less gregarious, and more prone to depression than their
better -nurtured peers. These early findings were the beginning of a
paradigm shift in our understanding of how experiences in childhood can
affect our health and the dialogue between the gut and the brain.
In another animal study , neuroscientists Paul Plotsky from Emory
University and Michael Meaney  studied rat pups whose moms  were either
naturally nurturing or naturally  negligent. After the pups grew up, they
stressed them by restraining them for a few minutes in tiny, formfitting
stalls. The better -nurtured rats had lower levels of corticoster one, the rat
stress hormone. (Cortisol is the human equivalent.) They also had hormonal
changes in their blood and brain that keep the body’ s stress response from
running wild. It turned out that pups that had been licked and cuddled
released several hormones, including growth hormone, that are essential for
the young brain’ s development.
In the meantime, a large body of scientific evidence has accumulated
that confirms the close relations hip between a mother ’s stress level and the
way the nervous system of the child will react to stress later in life. In
various laboratory situations that have been designed to stress an animal
mother—and thus affect her nurturing behavior toward her young—
researchers have found that the stress-induced changes in the mother ’s
behavior programs the offspring’ s brains to become more responsive to
stressful situatio ns, and create more anxiety in adults. No matter what the
initial stressor is or what kind of animal is involved, the effect is similar .
The more sever e the stress on the mother , the worse her behavior toward
her young, turning even once-nurturing moms into negligent mothers.
Stressed moms trampled their pups, didn’ t give them enough time to nurse,
and licked and cuddled them less. Some were so stressed out that they
killed their pups and ate them!
What was even more remarkabl e than observing the consistent negative
effects of maternal stress on their young’ s behavior were the insights into
the biological mechanisms underlying these behavioral changes. Studying
the brain s of affected mice has revealed dramatic structural and molecular
changes. Whole brain circuit s and connections developed  differently
depending on the mother ’s behavior , and several neurotransmitter systems
involved in these connections were altered. The neglected animals had
greater production of the stress molecule CRF, and less efficient systems
that can regula te the stress response, including the signaling circuit
involving the neurotransmitter GABA  (gamma-aminobutyric acid) and its
receptors. Becau se of these changes, even an antianxiety drug as strong as
Valium did little to ease their stress.
Largely as a consequence of my daily interaction with patients who
report experiencing adverse early life events—studies suggest that such a
history is reported by up to 40 percent of healthy people and up to 60
percent of IBS patients—my research during the past twenty years has
focused on better understanding the link between altered brain-gut
interactions and early life adversity .
Early Stress and the Hypersensitive Gut
Not long after publication of the first studies of how mothering can program
the brains of young rats, I recei ved an invitation to a conferenc e organized
by the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology that brings together
biological psychiatrists from across North America. Honored by the
invitation, I participated in a mini-symposium on stress mechanisms, where
I met Paul Plotsky , the neuroscientist from Emory University , for the first
time. Listening to his presentation about his work on stress in mother rats
and how it alters the biology and behavior of their young, I immediately
wondered how his findings could be applied and, more important, offer
some benefit to my patients with chronic gastrointestinal disorders.
Shortly after the conference I flew to Atlanta to explore possible ways
we could  collabo rate. It was a rainy , hot Atlanta evening, and over dinner at
a restaur ant and a drink at his house, Paul and I talked for hours about what
his work meant not only for stress-related gut disorders, but also for mind-
body science in general. I mentioned my patients’  gut disorder s, pain, and
other psychological symptoms. “That’ s me. I have all of that,” he joked. I
wondered aloud  whether my patients’  symptoms could be caused by
childhood progr amming of their brain-gut axis. And I decided to spend
some time in Paul’ s lab to explore this theory .
When I planned  these experiments, I had IBS patients like Jennifer in
mind. We knew by then that adverse childhood events predisposed adults to
anxiety , panic attacks, and depression. But other than a few reports linking
IBS symptoms to past sexual abuse, no one knew whether these sorts of
events caused gastrointestinal pain and altered bowel habits, and we had
absolutely no idea if alterations in our gut microbes were involved in these
processes.
When we stressed mother rats by separating them from their pups for
three hours a day during the first weeks of life, as Plotsky had, the pups
later showed many IBS-like features. In IBS patients, normal gut activity
can cause abdominal pain, cramping, and visible bloating of the stomach—
all of which stem largely from a hypersensitive and hyperresponsive gut.
The majority of patients also have elevated levels of anxiety , and a good
percentage suffer from an anxiety disorder or depression. In our
experiments, the rats that had experienced a less nurturing childhood
presented with similar traits. The animals were more anxious, their
intestines were more sensitive, and when stressed they would excrete more
small stool pelle ts, the rat equiv alent of diarrhea. Anyone who’ s ever had to
run to the bathroom before a big presentation or job interview knows the
feeling, but IBS patients—and our rats—suf fer from such stress-induced
symptoms all the time.
Remarkably , a chemical that blocks the action of the chemical CRF, the
master switch in the brain that we know is increased by early life stress,
banished all their symptoms: their stress-related behaviors, gut
hypersensitivity , and stress-induced diarrhea. Unfortunately , even though
such drugs could one day treat IBS and many other stress-sensitive
disorders, efforts to develop safe and effective medications targeted at the
CRF signaling system in the brain-gut axis have been unsuccessful so far.
Many scientists involved in this effort, including those in my own
laboratory , have  struggled to understand this failure. Is the story in humans
more complicated than originall y thought? While basic scientists are always
quick to make immediate conclusions about possible novel drug treatments
based on their rodent experimen ts, our brains are not only much larger than
those of rodents, but they have circuits and regions that are either
underdeveloped or don’t even exist in the brain of a mouse, such as our
prefrontal cortex  or the anterior insula. So I decided early on that if we
wanted to determine the relevance of the groundbreaking observations
made in animals for a better  understanding of medical symptoms in
humans, it was essential to look directly at the brain of human subjects who
had experienced early adversity .
With this goal in mind, we used the power of neuroimaging to look
directly into the brain of living human subjects. Using this technology , we
imaged the brains of one hundred healthy adults who before turning
eighteen had experienced neglect; verbal, emotional, or physical abuse;
serious parental illness or death of a parent; or divorce of their parents or
other serious family strife. I was amazed to discover that even  in healthy
individuals who exhibited no symptoms of anxiety , depress ion, or gut
dysfunction, their brain scans showed altered brain structures and altered
neural activity in brain networks that enable us to appraise the danger of a
situation or the meaning of a particular body sensation. This so-called
salience system also plays an important role in predicting positive or
negative outcom es of situations, and is an integral part of our gut-feeling-
based decision making. These findings were remarkable in several respects.
We had demonstrated for the first time in humans that our brains become
rewired in response to adverse experiences early in life—and that rewiring
can persist throughout our lifetime. As we saw these changes in completely
healthy people,  we also learned that such changes are not necessarily
accompanied by a particular health problem. While such individuals are
more likely to worry , to be anxious, and to be more risk-averse, they may
never encounter the GI problems that Jennifer suffered from. Could it be
that these altered brain networks simply put us at a higher risk of
developing a wide range of stress-sensitive disorders, includin g IBS? Our
studies have shown that IBS patients have brain network alterations that
play an important role in their hyperresponsiveness to psychological stress,
and to normal signals coming from the gastrointestinal tract in response to a
meal.
How Stress Effects Can Be Transmitted from One
Generation to the Next
One of the speakers at our Sedona conference was Rachel  Yehuda, a
prominent neuroscientist at New  York’s Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai. She talked about her groundbreaking findings that adult offspring of
Holocaust survi vors who had grown up without the experience of trauma
themselves had a greater risk of developing psychiatric disorders such as
depression, anxiety , and post-traumatic stress syndrome. Since then, several
additional studies have shown similar types of “inter generational
transmission” of stress and adversity , including studies of the offspring of
individuals who had to evacuat e the World Trade Center on 9/11, or who
had suffered through the Dutch  famine during World War II. How could
children raised in a safe and supportive environment by paren ts who had
experienced the unspeakable trauma be more at risk for developing
behavioral chan ges that are normally only seen in individuals who
experience such trauma themselves?
In Mean ey’s rat studies, when the daughters of stressed, neglectful rat
moms became mothers themse lves, they behaved no better toward their
own pups. His study found that the effect could last for several generations,
suggesting that the stress experi enced by the mother , and the ensuing effect
on her behavior toward her pups, could somehow be passed to their
offspring.
The question was how. It took several years of careful laboratory
detective work by Meaney and molecular biologist Moshe Szyf of McGill
University to unravel the myst ery, but the results revolutionized biology .
They found that very specific aspects of rat mother -pup interactions (such
as the arched-back nursing or licking) can chemically modify a newborn’ s
genes. Inside the cells of negle cted rat pups, enzymes attached chemical
tags called meth yl groups to their DNA. This mode of inheritan ce is called
epigenetic, since the tags sit on the DNA, and the prefix epi-, from ancient
Greek, means “upon.” It differs from the conventional, genetic mode of
heredity becaus e the tagged gene still carries the same infor mation, and
makes the same protein. But when it’ s tagged, it has a hard time doing so.
Here’ s another way to look at the underlying biology: If the human
genome—the collection of all of our genes—is the book of life, then a brain
cell, liver cell, and a heart cell each reads different sections of the book.
Epigenetic tags are the bookma rks and highlighting that tell a brain cell to
read one passage of the book and a liver or heart cell to read another .
Poor mothering altered just a few of the bookmarks and highlights. But
some of the tagged genes altered brain signaling, which made the adult
daughters poor mothers themsel ves. This caused their own pups to tag their
genes, and the cycle continued. We now know that this epigenetic editing of
our gene s can affect not only cells and mechanisms that determine how our
brain develops, but also our germ cells or gametes, which carry the genetic
information passed on to our children. The discovery of epigenetics ended a
long-running debate over the degree to which nature or nurture causes
stress-related diseases. Epigenetics violated everything modern biologists
had believed about inheritance.
Remember that Jennifer ’s mother and grandmother had suffered from
symptoms very similar to her own: depression, anxiety , and belly pain.
Most physicians  would take this as evidence that genes for these disorders
“ran” in Jennifer ’s family . But a study performed of nearly twelve thousand
twin pairs by Rona Levy at the University of Seattle, Washington, to
determine the role of heredity in IBS symptoms questioned such a simple
explanation. Not surprisingly , in genetically identical twins there was a
higher likelihood  that both twins suffered from IBS symptoms, compared to
such concordance in dizygotic twins. This finding confirmed  that genes
play an importa nt role in the development of IBS. However , Levy also
found that having parents with a diagnosis with IBS was a stronger
predictor of an IBS diagnosis in their children than having a twin with IBS.
This means that mechanisms other than gene s play a crucial role in the
intergenerational transmission of clinical diagnosis. While other
interpretations are possible (for example, the role of social learning), it is
plausible that epigenetic mechanisms also play an important role in
explaining the common family history of stress-sensitive disorders such as
IBS.
Epigenetics not only called into question the prevailing dogma that an
acquired trait could not be transm itted genetically; it also overturned dogma
in psych iatry. For a century , psychiatrists believed that the unconscious
mind contains buried feelings about early trauma, hidden desires, and
unresolved dynamics between mother and child. These unresolved issues
could cause psychological problems in adults, according to psychoanalytic
theory , as well as stress-related diseases like IBS in patients like Jennifer .
We know now that many of these Freudian ideas are flawed. Science
solidly supports the view that adversity experienced early in life, including
poor mothering, can hardwire heightened stress sensitivity in our brains,
and that this programming can be transmitted over generations,
perpetuating a vulnerability for a variety of brain disorders.
DOES YOUR CHILD HAVE A STRESSED
BRAIN-GUT AXIS?
If your grade school daughter is anxious, if your teenage son
gets so stressed out over quizze s and finals that he smokes pot
to calm himself,  only to take stimulants to overcome his ADHD
symptoms, or if your child suffers from IBS symptoms, is it
because you failed to sufficiently nurture them when they were
young? Rest assured, the answe r to these questions is a definite
NO. Women nurture their newborns through breastfeeding,
touch, and other forms of body  contact, behaviors akin to the
arched-back nursing, licking, and grooming that nurture healthy
brain development in young rats.
However , huma n brains are immensely more complex than
rat brains. And there are many  examples of highly successful
and happy individuals, who had stressed-out single moms
struggling to make a living, or who have overcome even the
most severe forms of early adve rsity. In humans, there are many
factors that can protect us from the negative effects of early life
stress, ranging from genetic factors, to buffering effects during
early development. Stay-at-home dads, grandparents, older
siblings, nurturing nannies can all help create a supportive,
stable family environment, helping children overcome the
effects of early adversity . And keep in mind that the time
window during which the development of the stress system is
impacted by outside influences lasts up to twenty years in
humans.
And even if such buffering factors are not present, as
humans we have many tools at our disposal that allow us to
partially reverse the programming from early stress and trauma
in ways that rats and other animals cannot. For example, several
mind-based therapies, including cognitive behavioral therapy ,
hypnosis, and meditation, have all been shown to change the
way we appraise situations and body sensations. All of these
therapeutic modalities are not just psychological treatments;
they also have the ability to improve the cortical control over
emotional and stress-generating circuits in our brains. We now
know that such therapies can alter the structure and function of
the brain’s networks involved in attention, emotional arousal,
and salience assessment, primarily by strengthening our brain’ s
prefrontal cortex.
The Gut Microbiome Under Stress
Up to now, much of our discussion has focused on the programming of our
brain circuits by early life experiences. There is no question that in
vulnerable individuals, a disturbance of a stable, nurturing environment
during the first two decades of life can change the development of the adult
brain and behavior . These changes can be understood as an early
programming of our nervous system in a way that reflects our first negative
interactions with the world. And we shouldn’ t forget that a hyperreactive
stress system may provide some advantage if one is born into a dangerous
environment. But what benefit is there to suffer from IBS symptoms
throughout life as a “side effect” unintended by evolution? And what are the
consequences of such a programmed brain-gut axis for our interactions with
the trillions of microbes living in our gut?
We have made tremendous progress in understanding the relationship
between early adversity , changes in the cross talk between the gut and the
brain, and the role of the gut microbiome in these interactions. It is
becoming clear that early life stress not only affects the brain and the gut,
but also has a profound ef fect on the gut microbiome as well.
Studies have shown that when adolescent rhesus monkeys leave their
mothers for the first time, they develop separation anxiety and diarrhea—
just like many teenagers do when they leave home for college. Diarrhea
develops because stress causes  the gut to contract more forcefully and
propel ingested food faster throughout its length. In addition, stress
increases the secretion of variou s digestive juices into the gut. These stress-
induced changes in gut function have dramatic effects on the living
conditions for gut microbes. In response, fecal bacteria numbers drop
significantly , and the ranks of lactobacilli, a genus of protective bacteria,
thin the most. Pathogenic microbes such as Shigella or E. coli are
emboldened, opening the door to gut infections. The stress hormone
norepinephrine also makes such invaders more aggressive and more
persistent. In the monkey experiments, though, the stress effects were
temporary . By the end of the first week, when the young monkeys adapted
to their newfou nd independence, their gut lactobacilli levels returned to
normal levels. Since the effect on the gut microbiota was transient, does it
matter? Do these transient microbial changes have any ef fect on our brains?
In a recent study by Premysl Bercik’ s group at McMaster University , in
Hamilton, Ontario, the investig ators confirmed our earlier findings in the
same animal model that poor mothering was responsible for the increased
responsiveness of the gut to stress, consistent with alterations in the brain’ s
stress circuits. But remember that animals with compromised maternal care
also showed other changes, such as anxiety and depression-like behaviors.
Bercik’ s group identified for the first time the special role of the gut
microbiota in the development  of these behavioral changes. It was only
these “psychological” consequences of compromised maternal behavior that
were dependent on the alterations in the gut microbiota and their
metabolites, whereas the changes in gut reactivity were related to the
increased stress responsiveness in animals. If these remarkable findings can
be confi rmed in human studies, it would have profound implications not
only for our full understanding of the role of the gut microbiota in stress-
related psychiatric disorders, but also for the treatment of patients like
Jennifer and others with stress-sensitive disorders and a history of early
adversity . Modulating the gut microbiota with dietary interventions and
with pre- and probiotics, thereby  reversing some of the effects of the altered
gut microbes on the brain, could become an important tool in the integrative
treatment plan.
Stress in the Womb
It has long been known that if you’re pregnant, your stress level can
jeopardize your baby’ s future health. Babies born to highly stressed mothers
develop more slowly , weigh less at birth, and are more vulnerable to
infections. However , until very recently little has been known about the
potentially detrimental effects of maternal stress on the behavior and brain
development of the of fspring.
Two lines of evidence pinned some of these stress effects to changes in
our microbial companions. First, monkey experiments showed that maternal
stress alters our gut microbiota. Neurobiologist Chris Coe, of the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, exposed pregnant rhesus monkeys to alarming
noises on and off for ten minutes every weekday for six weeks. This
stressed the monkey moms abou t as much as traffic, noise, or working until
a few days before delivery stresses a pregnant mom in a big city.
Surprisingly , newborns of the stressed-out monkey moms had much fewer
good gut bacte ria—lactobacilli and bifidobacteria—than newborns of
monkey moms who’d been left in peace.
At first it was unclear how maternal stress could alter the newbo rn’s gut
microbiota, since the unborn baby’s gut is largely devoid of microbes. But
now we know that stress can alter the mother ’s vaginal microbiota, which in
turn has a major influence on the newborn’ s gut microbes. Neuroscientist
Tracy Bale, of the University of Pennsylvania, and her team stressed out
pregnant mice by exposing them to a series of uncomfortable situations,
including the lingering odor of a fox. Bale’ s laboratory had previously
shown that the same prenatal stress paradigm resulted  in major
neurodevelopmental changes in male pups in emotion- and stress-regulating
brain networks.
In addit ion to what we already know about the effects of stress on an
animal’ s gut microbiota, the investigators found major changes in the
vaginal  microbiome of the stressed moms, in particular a reduction in
lactobacilli. It had long been known that stress-induced reductions in
vaginal lactobacilli can change the acidity of the vaginal environment and
predispose wom en to vaginal infections. But why on earth would these
stress effects on the vaginal microbiome be so important for the young
animal’ s brain development and behavior?
Because the mother ’s vaginal  microbes first seed the baby’ s gut
microbiota, these mice gave birth to babies with fewer lactobacilli in their
guts, just as the stressed monkey moms had babies with reduced  lactobacilli
in their intestines. This stress effect is particularly concerning as it occurs at
a crucia l time, when the complex architectures of both the baby’ s gut
microbiome and its brain circuits are being programmed for a lifetime.
But the mouse mom’s stress didn’ t just affect her pups’  gut microbes—it
affected their brains as well! Bale’ s team analyzed the mix of molecules
produced by the baby mice’ s microbiota. They found changes in molecules
that supply the animals with energy, which the infant’ s brain consumes
voraciously , and a short supply of amino acids, which help the fast-
developing brain grow and form new connections between certain brain
regions.
What are the implications of these laboratory studies for women
experiencing pregnancy and motherhood today? Many adult brain
disorders, includ ing anxiety , depression, schizophrenia, autism , and most
likely IBS, are now considered neurodevelopmental disorders, meaning that
the basic brain changes start very early in life, many of them already in
utero. As we have learned, stress is a major factor that influences these
neurodevelopment changes, and there are at least two major pathways by
which early adversity can affect the brain-gut axis: one is by epigenetic
modification of the stress respon se system and the brain-gut axis; the other
one is through stress-induced changes in the gut microbiot a and their
products, which  can further affect the brain. This means if we really want to
have a major and long-lasting impact on the development and trajectory of
these devastating  diseases, interventions will have to start very early in life.
Once the adult patient comes to the clinic with the full-blown syndrome,
most treatments  will be largely symptomatic and transient, while it is more
challenging to get long-lasting therapeutic success. But as we will see in the
case of Jennifer , the new understanding made possible by recent science
opens up more ef fective treatment options for the adult patient as well.
Microbes for a Healthy Start
Years before I began my research career , I witnessed an astou nding event
that even today sways my thinking about our microbial compa nions. On a
winter break from college, I had been lucky enough to join a documentary
filmmaker on an expedition to film the Yanomami people, who live on the
upper Orinoco River, deep in the rain forest of Brazil and Venezuela. One
moonlit night, I lay in my hammock near my host Yanom ami family ,
listening to the sounds of the jungle and unable to sleep. I stood  up, heard a
noise nearby, and walked a few steps into the surrounding forest. There I
saw a fifteen-ye ar-old native woman alone, squatting over a large banana
leaf on the ground, giving birth to her child in nearly comp lete silence.
After delivering  the baby , she severed the umbilical cord with a sharp
object.
Here was a child being born naturally , without any help or medical
intervention, and so quietly that no one else in the entire village seemed to
notice. The circumstances of this childbirth were a world away from our
modern hospital deliveries, which I had experienced during my medical
training: no sterile hospital environment, no ob-gyns to treat the mother ’s
vagina with antiseptics to “cleanse” it of microbes. Instead the newest
Yanomami had been exposed not only to the mother ’s vaginal microbiome
but also to all the microbes on her (unwashed and unsanitized) hands, on
the bana na leaf and in the soil. Yet over the next weeks, the baby cuddled
by both parents seemed perfectly healthy .
In the Western world, childbirth  goes a lot differently , of course, and the
roots of our own practices run deep. At the turn of the twentieth century ,
French pediatrician Henry Tissier proposed that human infants develop
within a sterile environment, and that our first contact with microorganisms
occurs when we are exposed to the vaginal microbiota during  birth. This
view has remained dogma for more than one hundred years , but today
there’ s good reason to doubt it.
Even in healthy pregnancies, maternal gut bacteria—most of them
beneficial—have turned up in umbilical cord blood, amniotic fluid,
meconium, and on the placenta, according to recent work. As the time of
delivery nears, the vaginal micro biota changes a great deal. The diversity of
microbial specie s decreases, and a lactobacillus species normally found in
the small intestine becomes more prevalent. During birth, a baby born
naturally is exposed to the mother ’s vaginal microbiota, including this
lactobacillus species, providing the key source of microbes to colonize the
infant’ s gut. In this way, your mother ’s distinct set of vagin al microbes
formed the basis  for your own distinct pattern of gut microbes, and will for
the rest of your life. The mother ’s microbes also supply our newborns with
a key piece of its metabolic machinery , giving the baby the ability to digest
the milk sugars and special carbohydrates in breast milk.
Since vaginal microbes can get your newborn’ s intestinal tract off to a
healthy start, scientists are now studying whether cesarean delivery
jeopardizes a newborn’ s future  brain health. It is amazing that in such
countries as Brazil and Italy the rates of C-section delivered babies surpass
those who come into this world in the natural way, even though we have no
clue about the long-term consequences of “bypassing” the normal vaginally
mediated gut microbiome progr amming on brain development. So far we
know that the intestines of cesarean-born infants are colonized not by the
mother ’s vagina l microbes, but by microbes from the mother ’s skin, from
midwives, physi cians, and nurses, and from other newborns in the maternity
ward, and that important bene ficial bacteria such as bifidobacteria take
longer to colonize their guts than they do the guts of babies born vaginally .
We know  the dangerous gut microbe Clostridium difficile  is more likely to
overgrow in the gut and harm C-section babies, and that C-section babies
are more  likely to become obese  as they get older . Scientists suspect that C-
section birth may also make a child more vulnerable to brain- gut changes
and serious brain disorders, including autism, and several studies are under
way to find out for sure. And finally, we know from a landmark study by M.
Blazer ’s group in mice that the transient disturbances of the gut microbiota
in early life by low doses of antibiotics can have long-lasting effects on the
vulnerability of adults to the detrimental results of a high-fat diet on obesity .
Adapted for Survival
Survival of the species is one of the dogmas of evolution, and nature has
programmed every species to deliver it. That’ s how we and our animal
forebears have survived for millions of years. In this chapter , I’ve described
several mechan isms by which early life stress can influence brain and
behavior of animals and humans, and have focused on our growing
understanding of how stressful environments and stressed mothers imbue
long-lasting changes in their baby’ s brain. Using different biological
pathways and mechanisms, these changes program his or her stress-
response system for a dangerous world. By interacting with her child, a
mother modifies the salience system in her infant’ s brain so that the baby’ s
gut feelings are biased in a way to be prepared for a potentiall y dangerous
world when he or she has grow n up. She alters the microbes in her vagina,
changing her infant’ s gut microbiome. She tags key stress-response genes
with chemicals called methyl groups, providing epigeneti c changes that can
last for several generations.
Why would evolution have developed a system that makes us unhealthy
and unhappy? If nature, in its wisdom, devised several strategies toward a
single end, and if those strategie s can be seen in many species, including us
humans, they must be there for a good reason.
The science all points in one direction. When the mother perceives
danger , these strategies inculcat e into her baby a heightened fight-or -flight
response, plus more careful, less aggressive, and less outgoing behaviors.
Even without her knowledge, she’s preparing her baby for a world she
perceives as dangerous.
This system may have helped us when we had to flee attacking lions or
vanquish a competitor in a fistfight, as our ancient ancestors did. Even
though no scien tific data is available to prove this hypothesis, it may even
make millions of people today who are unfortunate enough to have to face
battles, famines, and natural disasters, or who grow up in rough
neighborhoods, more resilient and better adapted to deal with their hostile
living conditions.
But those of us in relatively safe, industrialized societies pay a high
price for these ancient and inborn biological programs. As we’ve seen, an
overactive fight -or-flight system  with constantly elevated stress hormones
circulating throu gh our bodies can lead to serious mental illnes s, including
anxiety disorder s, panic disorders, and depression. It can also cause a nasty
assortment of stress-sensitive physical disorders, including obesity ,
metabolic syndrome, heart attacks, and strokes. And finally , the
hyperresponsiveness of the brain-gut axis associated with this programming
can cause chronic gut disorders like irritable bowel syndrome and chronic
abdominal pain.
We don’t yet know whether a pregnant woman should worry if she deals
with commuter traffic, project deadlines, and financial worries, and works
until a few days before she’s due. And we don’t yet know the degree to
which practices that alter the vaginal microbiome, such as antimicrobials
before and during delivery , birth by cesarean section, or a young mother ’s
diet and stress, jeopardize a child’ s health. We also don’t know whether the
huge changes we’ve made to our babies’  early lives help explain the
meteoric rise of autism, obesity , and other diseases over the last half
century . However , it is clear that certain types of stress during pregnancy ,
and familial distress during the time when our children grow up, are
harmful for their brain development and carry a high risk of permanently
altering the architecture of their brain-gut-microbiome axis. I feel strongly
that any interference with the normal programming of the infant’ s gut
microbiome through avoidable stress, non-vaginal delivery , unne cessary use
of antib iotics, and unhealthy dietary habits during the pre- and postnatal
periods can lay the groundwork  for brain-gut disorders. And the changes to
the child’s brain-gut axis may not be noticeable until later in life, when it
may be too late to reverse them. Becoming aware of these connections and
understanding the basic biological mechanisms is the first step.
Implementing strategies to minimize these unhealthy influences is often
more difficult. However , adherin g to a healthy diet, practicing simple stress-
reduction techniques during pregnancy , and being vigilant to avoid
unnecessary antibiotic exposure are all options most mothers are able to
consider .
New Therapies for Brain-Gut Disorders
We now know that from the time a fetus is in the womb, the stress level
experienced by her mom can alter her susceptibility to stress, gut diseases,
anxiety disorders, and depressio n. And this early life programming is not
limited to maternal behaviors. We also know that any event that’s a major
threat to a child’ s well-being can alter susceptibility to the same conditions.
All of these findings can help us to understand the roots of Jennifer ’s
health problems. Recall that when she was still in her mother ’s womb, her
maternal grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer , precipitating great
grief and anxiety  in her pregnan t mother . When Jennifer was a young child
and needed a nurturing family environment, her parents fought bitterly .
When Jennifer was eight, her parents divorced. A large number of patients
with IBS report early life stress , and Jennifer had it in spades. Such stress
most likely upped her odds of developing anxiety , depression, and GI
symptoms as an adult. The fact that both her mother and grandmother
suffered stress-sensitive syndromes similar to hers further increased her
vulnerability to develop those symptoms as well, presumably through
genetic or epigenetic mechanisms or both.
These days, when I meet a patient like Jennifer who has chronic stress-
related symptom s, including anxiety or IBS, I base my advice on the
evolving science of brain-gut interactions as discussed in this chapter . “Your
early experience s almost certainly played a role in the development of your
symptoms,” I say, “both in terms of your gut symptoms, as well as your
anxiety and depression.” I want to make sure that the patient understands
the biological nature of her symptoms—that it’s not just “in their head,” as
other doctors might have said. “But if it has all been hardwired during my
first years of life, and if my family history further increases the odds that I
will suffer from these symptoms, does that mean I have to live with this
pain for the rest of my life?” Jennifer asked me, somewhat distressed. I told
her that the bad news is that her brain-gut axis had been programmed for
life, but the good news is that humans have a very unique part of the brain,
the prefrontal cortex, which gives us the ability to override the function of
altered brain circuits and learn new behaviors.
There are several therapies that help us to learn these new behaviors,
much as adding some new code—a patch—to an exist ing computer
program can override the flaws  in the program. Such therapies include a
short course of cognitive beha vioral therapy , hypnosis, or another mind-
body interventio n such as mindfulness-based stress reduction. Not only do
these strategies ease brain-gut symptoms, such as those of irritable bowel
syndrome, but they also often help treat associated symptoms of depression
and anxiety . And there’ s more  good news from recent research. These
approaches can actually change  the wiring of our brains, thereby helping
the prefrontal cortex exert some control on an overactive emotional brain
network. They can also help to reset the brain salience system , improving
the way we appraise potentially threatening situations. Sometimes these
mind-based approaches require a little help from the often-maligned
psychotropic medications, in particular different types of antidepressants
that have shown beneficial effects in mouse models of early life stress. My
initial treatment  plan almost always includes very low doses of tricyclic
antidepressants like Elavil or similar drugs that help calm the firestorm in
their limbic system in early stages of therapy . The same drugs can reduce
abdominal pain with minimal side effects, and without any effects on mood
or ment al state.  And, if approp riate for the patient, full doses  of modern
antidepressants, including SSRIs, can ease anxiety and depression and
stabilize mood. These drugs by themselves provide significan t benefit in
about 30 percent of patients, but the success rate is much higher when
combined with other , nonpharmacological treatments.
Based on our new scientific insights into the role of gut micro biota in
the altered brain-gut interaction s, I also told Jennifer to increase her intake
of probiotics. Beneficial microbes such as lactobacilli and bifidobacteria
delivered via fermented foods , yogurts, or in probiotic capsules may
improve the diversity of the gut microbial ecosystem. In addition to
naturally occurr ing probiotics in fermented foods, I recommend  a trial of a
small number of probiotics that have proven beneficial in clinical trials.
In the end, Jennifer agreed to the integrative therapy approach I
recommended to her, which included a short course of cognitive  behavioral
therapy , including instructions in self-relaxation and self-hypnosis. She
switched to a diet high in fermented foods and supplementary probiotics,
and adde d the low dose of the antidepressant Elavil to her long-term Celexa
intake. I emphasized to her that she’d probably need both the medications
and nonpharmacological therapies to get better , but if she followed the
treatment plan there was a good chance that she could ease off the drugs
within a year .
Jennifer ’s symp toms didn’ t disappear completely . But several  months
later, when she returned to my clinic for a follow-up visit, she reported a 50
percent improvement of her quality of life and overall well-bein g, and much
less frequent abdominal pain, long periods of nearly normal bowel
movements, and far less anxiety . Before leaving my office, she shook my
hand and with tears in her eyes said, “I wish someone had explained to me
all of these connections much earlier , in particular the fact that my rough
early life set me up for anxiety , depression, and IBS.” Jennife r is not the
only patient who has left my of fice telling me that.
In a sense, people like Jennifer  have adapted perfectly to the stressful
world of their youth, with their brains, guts, and even their gut microbes
programmed in multiple ways for danger . If more doctors knew this, they’d
help, rather than frustrate, patie nts with IBS and many other stress-related
disorders. And if more patients knew this, they would find help faster and
have more peace of mind.
But early life programming affects us all. Our mothers instinctively and
biologically programmed us for survival, beginning when we were still in
the womb. Later , our families did the best they could to steer us through a
complex world.  All this leave s us with a lasting trace on our basic
emotional make up, and influences how we cope, how we make decisions,
and possibly our personality . By understanding how this natural
programming operates, and by learning how to patch any maladapted
software, we can avoid overrea ctions that no longer serve us, if they ever
did.
CHAPTER
6
A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF EMOTIONS
From our earliest days, emotions have colored our thoughts and influenced
our decisions. When danger looms, emotions help you fight or flee; they
fuel the drives that help you find a partner , and they help you bond with
your children. Emotions create your tastes, influence your health, foster pet
peeves, and inflame your passions. Emotional feelings are quintessential to
what makes us human.
As philosophers, psychologists, and, later, neuroscientists investigated
emotion over the centuries, they devised increasingly sophisticated theories
to explain how emotions arise, pinning their origin to the mind, the brain, or
the body . But over the last few years, scientific data has emer ged suggesting
that they may be influenced by a source almost nobody had expe cted. These
revolutionary findings suggest that the microbiota in our gut play a critical
role in the comp lex interactions between mind, brain, and gut. This exciting
line of research has inspired paradigm-breaking ideas regarding the role of
these invisible creatures in our gut reactions and gut feelings, and how they
may af fect our mood, minds, and thoughts.
Can Your Gut Microbes Change Your Brain?
When I first examined Lucy , a sixty-six-year -old woman, several years ago,
her medical problems didn’ t seem particularly unusual. For many years she
had been suffering from mild constipation and discomfort in her belly , and
she had been given a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. What made
Lucy’ s story so curious was her anxiety symptoms. By the time she came
under my care, she’d been suffering from severe panic attacks every few
weeks for two years. The symptoms included intense fear, heart
palpitations, shortness of breath, and a sense of doom. These symptoms
came on suddenly and usually subsided within twenty minutes. In the
periods between these dramatic attacks, she had noticed, her general anxiety
level had also increased. While many of the patients who see me for their
gastrointestinal symptoms report a history of panic attacks, the
circumstances surrounding the onset of Lucy’ s symptoms were highly
unusual.
About two years ago she developed chronically recurring sinus
congestion and headaches, and she was diagnosed with a sinus infection.
While taking a two-week course of ciprofloxacin, a commonly used broad-
spectrum antibio tic that kills a wide variety of pathogens (as well as our
own gut microbes), she noticed that her bowel movements had become
more frequent and looser , though she was fine otherwise. To counter these
effects, she took probiotics for a couple of weeks and once again felt like
her usual self.
About six months later, the same symptoms of congestion and
headaches recurred. Her physic ian prescribed an alternate broad- spectrum
antibiotic, which  she took for three weeks. Again she experien ced similar
chronic discomfort in her belly . So far, none of this was out of the ordinary:
many patients develop a transien t change in their bowel habits when taking
antibiotics because the medications temporarily suppress the diversity of
gut microbes that are essential for optimal gut function. We know from
patient reports and clinical studies that these side effects can include
prolonged gastrointestinal discomfort and sometimes even IBS-like
symptoms. In the great majority  of patients, however , these GI problems are
temporary . It appears that patients who start out with less diverse
microbiota are more susceptible to these side ef fects.
Since Lucy was no longer taking antibiotics, I encouraged her to eat and
drink a wide variety of fermented foods of all types, including yogurt,
sauerkraut, and kimchi, and to take additional probiotic supplements as
well. The goal was to increase the diversity of her gut microbiota in the
hope to reestabl ish her original microbial architecture. At the same time, I
strongly encoura ged her to use approaches aimed at relieving her anxiety
symptoms, inclu ding self-relaxa tion techniques, deep abdomina l breathing,
and mindfulness classes. I also prescribed Klonopin, a Valium-like
medication that dissolves under the tongue, to be taken if and when Lucy
began to experience a full-blown panic attack. This combined treatment
regimen gradually normalized her bowel movements, and over a six-month
period, her panic  attacks became less frequent. When I last saw her, she had
experienced only a single, mild attack, and she no longer needed to take the
Klonopin.
Lucy’ s panic attacks and her increased anxiety had developed  several
weeks after her GI symptoms, and they became less frequent when her
digestive sympto ms improved. I suspected that the two consecutive courses
of broad -spectrum antibiotics she took may have temporarily altered the
population and function of her gut microbio ta. This would have led to her
IBS-like GI symptoms, which disappeared shortly after stopping the
medication. Could the antibiotic have induced gut microbial changes that
contributed to her anxiety symptoms as well?
Are Gut Microbiota Our Own Xanax Factory?
With the excepti on of a few clinical case reports, there was little science to
support a connection between our gut microbiota and emotional states when
I saw Lucy in my clinic in 2011. But later that year a group of pioneering
investigators in Canada reported some intriguing findings from animal
experiments that suggested that gut microbes themselves produce
neurotransmitters that could change emotional behavior .
Premysl Bercik and his group at McMaster University had treated a
group of normal mice for a week with a cocktail consisting of three broad-
spectrum antibiotics. They monitored the mice’ s gut microbiota
composition and their behavio r before, during, and after the antibiotic
treatment. As they expected, the treatment profoundly altered the makeup of
the animals’  gut microbial populations, increasing populations of some
groups of microbes (in particular several species of lactobacilli) and
decreasing popu lations of others. However , Bercik was surprise d to see that
the antibiotic-tre ated mice engaged in more exploratory behavior , such as
spending more time in the well-lit, open areas of their cages or experimental
setups rather than the dark and protected locations they usually prefer . Since
mice can’t tell us about their anxiety symptoms, this behavior is used as a
proxy that indic ates that the animals are less anxious, or as scientists say,
that they showed less “anxiety-like behaviors.”
Two weeks after the mice had completed the antibiotic course, both
their behavior and their gut microbiota returned to their normal state,
suggesting that the observed changes in the animals’  emotional behavior
and the antibioti c-induced chang es in their gut microbiota were related. But
how was the brain informed about the antibiotic-induced changes in the
gut? An obvious candidate for such gut microbe-to-brain signaling was the
vagus nerve, the main communication highway between the gut and the
brain. And indeed, mice in whic h the vagus nerve was cut no longer showed
the reduction in anxiety when their microbes were suppressed by the
antibiotic.  These findings suggested that in normal mice, gut microbes
produced a steady supply of substances that were able to suppress anxiety ,
and their ef fect was transmitted to the brain through the vagus nerve.
What substances might the gut microbes produce that have such an
anxiolytic effect? Previous studies had shown that certain microor ganisms
are able to produce the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid. This
substance, also referred to as GABA, is one of the most abundant signaling
molecules in the nervous system , where it keeps the emotional  part of our
brain, the limbic system, in check. Many of our antianxiety medications,
such as Valium, Xanax, and Klonopin, target the same signaling system,
mimicking the ef fects of GABA.
Earlier clues about the connect ion between gut microbes, GABA, and
brain function had been observed some thirty years ago in patients with
advanced liver cirrhosis; such patients’  mental status and alertness are
commonly impaired. When they are given a drug that blocks the GABA
signaling system, cognitive function and energy level improve rapidly .
Surprisingly , brain function also improved when they received broad-
spectrum antibiotics. At the time, investigators had not been able to explain
well how cirrho sis of the liver could increase GABA  activity in the brain.
But today we know that the increased GABA  produced in the gut by altered
microbes finds its way to the specific GABA  receptors in the brain, where it
dampens cognitive processes as well as emotional brain systems. Just like
in Bercik’ s mouse experiments, broad-spectrum antibiotics reduce the
populations of these GABA-producing bacteria, leading to lower GABA
levels in the brain and improved brain function.
While these experiments have clearly established the fact that microbes
living in our gut can produc e antianxiety molecules, and that these
substances can affect the brain under certain circumstances, the great
majority of patients who receive antibiotics show no evidence of emotional
side effects. But could we use this knowledge to treat anxiety disorders with
GABA-producing microbes, in the form of probiotics? We know that
certain strains of two of the best-studied families of beneficial gut bacteria,
the lacto bacilli and the bifidobacteria, have the synthetic machinery to
produce GABA. Since different  strains of bacteria from these two families
are activ e ingred ients in most commercially available probiotics, and both
groups also tend to be abundan t in fermented food products, is it possible
that adding an extra supply of these microbes to our diet makes us more
relaxed? Could a regimen as simple as eating fermented foods and taking
probiotics help anxiety-prone individuals reduce their anxiety levels? A
small number of studies performed in mice suggest that this may indeed be
the case. In one study , investigators observed a decrease in anxiety-like
behavior when they fed the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus  to healthy
adult mice. In another study , a different probiotic species, Lactobacillus
longum , was found to decrease anxiet y-like behaviors markedly in mice
with colitis, a chronic inflammation of the large intestine. And there is some
clinical evidence suggesting that such “psychobiotic” effects can be
achieved in patients.
The only reliable way to evaluate the possible effect of probiotics on the
human brain is to perform a controlled clinical trial on human subjects. In
such a trial, volunteers are randomly assigned to either a group that ingests
the active treatment—a probio tic, for example—or to a control group.
Those in the control group ingest a placebo—a food that is
indistinguishable from the treatment in appearance, taste, or flavor , but that
has no known intrinsic action. To increase the reliability of such a study ,
neither the study participants nor the investigators are allowed to know until
after the study is completed which treatment group a subject was assigned
to. Such blinded, randomized, controlled study designs are the gold
standard in assessing the ef fectiveness of all treatments in medicine.
In 2013, Kirsten Tillisch used such a study design at our researc h center
and randomly assigned thirty- six women to one of three experimental
groups. Twice a day for four weeks, the active-treatment group ate yogurt
enriched with a particular strain of the probiotic Bifidobacterium lactis ,
along with three other types of bacteria (Streptococcus thermophiles ,
Lactobacillus bulgaricus , and Lactococcus lactis ) that are typically used to
turn milk into yogurt. A second group ate a nonfermented milk product that
had no probiotic s but was indis tinguishable in taste, texture, or appearance
from the probiotic-enriched yogurt. A third group ate no yogurt or milk
product at all.
At the beginning and end of the four-week study , we asked each woman
about her overall well-being, mood, level of anxiety , and bowel habits.
Then Tillisch scanned each woman’ s brain as she lay in an MRI scanner and
performed a task designed to test her ability to assess other people’ s
emotions from their facial expressions.
The task consisted of watching the faces of three different people who
looked angry , scared, or sad, and quickly identifying which two of the three
faces displayed the same emotion, by simply pushing a button. People
around the world, regardless of race, country , or language, are extremely
good at making such assessmen ts in a fraction of a second, suggesting that
this is a very basic, inborn emotional reflex response that is likely related to
the emotional reflex behavior of animals. The task does not involve the
complex brain networks needed  to generate emotional feelings, so subjects
don’t feel sad or angry doing the task.
Compared with women who ate the milk product with no probiotics,
women who received the probiotic mix for four weeks showed less
connectivity between a number of brain regions during the emotion
recognition task. These results showed for the first time that some of the
astonishing results from mouse studies apply to humans as well—
specifically , that manipulating gut microbiota could measurably change
human brain function during a task related to emotions, at least at a very
basic emotional reflex level.
But how did the probiotic bacteria from the yogurt communicate with
our subjects’  brains? We initially thought that the regular intake of the
probiotics may alter the gut microbial composition, which in turn may have
an influ ence on the brain. However , when we analyzed the microbial
composition in the stool of study participants, there were no detectable
effects of the probiotic ingesti on on the types and numbers  of the gut
microbiota, other than the presence of the ingested probiotic organism itself.
Thus the yogurt consumption didn’ t change the players among the gut
microbiota. However , based on an earlier study , we knew that the identical
probiotic treatm ent can change the metabolites that the gut microbes
produce. It is therefore reasonab le to speculate that some of these probiotic-
stimulated meta bolites reached the brain—either via the bloodstream or in
the form of a vagal nerve signal—to change the emotional reactivity of the
brain. There may even be an involvement of the gut’s serotonin-containing
cells in this microbe-brain comm unication. It has recently been shown that
certain gut microbes can stimulate the production of serotonin in these cells,
altering seroton in levels in the gut and profoundly influencing the
availability of this gut-brain signal to modulate our emotions, pain
sensitivity , and well-being. If confirmed, the implications of these findings
for the future treatment of brain-gut disorders are truly amazing. By
consuming certain types of probiotics—either contained in naturally
fermented foods  or enriched in dairy products or fruit juice s—that can
regulate levels of the vital neurotransmitter serotonin, we may be able to
fine-tune a control system in our body that plays such a crucial role in many
of our vital functions, ranging from mood to pain sensitivity and sleep.
As our study subjects were carefully selected to be healthy , without any
evidence of physical or psychological symptoms, we can only speculate if
the chan ges we observed with the particular probiotic we evaluated might
have affected their anxiety levels. However , as subjects showed a reduced
responsiveness of emotional brain networks when paying attention to angry ,
sad, and fearful faces, we know that certain probiotics are able to dampen
emotional reactions to negative contexts.
I was amazed at these findings. Just a few years ago, few would have
thought that regular consumption of a yogurt that you can buy in the
supermarket could influence your brain. For our research team, the results
opened up a completely new way of looking at how our brains function in
health and disease—and how to keep our minds healthy .
It is only in the last few years that scientists have begun to investigate
the role of nutrition in brain health, and to identify a possible role of the gut
microbiota in this relationship. Based on the rapidly advancing science of
this field, I am convinced that this new perspective will profoundly change
our concepts of which foods are beneficial to our emotional and mental
well-being. And it may influence the way we treat anxiety disorders and
depression in the future.
The Role of the Microbiota in Depression
If you’ve ever been depressed, you probably recall how sad, discouraged,
and hopeless you felt. Those are the symptoms we usually talk about when
describing depression to friends and family , and it’s a painful state of
affairs. But perhaps you can also recall some other symptoms . Were you
nervous or irritable? Did you have a hard time sleeping or concentrating?
These are the same symptoms a person with an anxiety disord er develops.
Nearly half of the people diagnosed as depressed have symptoms of
anxiety , and many chronically anxious people have symptoms of
depression. And therapies for depression—particularly the medications
known as select ive serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs—of ten ease the
anxiety symptoms as well. The two disorders are close cousins.
Since various manipulations of the gut microbiota in mice, including the
ingestion of probiotics, can ease anxiety-like behavior of these animals,
might they ease the mouse equivalent of depression as well? John F. Cryan,
a psychiatrist from University College, in Cork, Ireland, has published
several papers supporting this hypothesis, coining the catchy term
melancholic microbes to refer to these mood-altering properties of gut
microor ganisms.
In one study , his team gave laboratory rats the probiotic bacteria
Bifidobacterium infantis , so named because it’s one of the first bacterial
strains a new mother transmits to her infant. They then made the rats swim,
which these animals dislike and which activates their stress system. When
this happens, blood levels of cytokines, a type of inflammatory molecule,
climb (the same  response happens in humans). When the rats were given a
probiotic, it seemed to moderat e the changes in both their blood and their
brain, although it did not alter the animals’  “depressed” behavior . In another
study , the researchers were able to show that a particular strain of
Bifidobacterium  reduced experimentally induced depression and anxiety-
like behavior in mice as much as the commonly used antidepressant
medication Lexapro.
Do these result suggest that probiotics be helpful in human depression
as well? Preliminary results suggest that this may be the case in some
depressed individuals. In a randomized, blinded study , French investigators
gave fifty-five healthy men and women a monthlong regimen of a daily
probiotic containing species of lactobacillus and bifidobacteria. Those in the
probiotic group showed a small  improvement in psychological distress and
anxiety compar ed to those taking the control product. In another study ,
British research ers gave a different lactobacillus species to 124 healthy
people. In people who were more depressed when the study  began, the
treatment significantly improved their mood.
While these studies are a good start, we need bigger and better -designed
clinical trials to firmly establish whether probiotic microor ganisms can
cheer you up if you’re depressed, calm you down when you’re anxious, or
affect your mental well-being. In the meantime, you can positively
influence your brain-gut-microbiota dialogue by paying more attention to
what you feed your gut micro bes. As we will learn in greater detail in
subsequent chap ters, what we eat has a major impact on gut health, giving
us an easy, enjoy able, and inexpensive way to modify and improve our gut-
brain interactions.
The Role of Stress
Most patients with anxiety disorders, depression, IBS, or other brain and
brain-gut disorders are particularly sensitive to stressful events, often
experiencing a flare-up of GI symptoms when they’re under stress. Today
we know that gut microbes play a major role in determining the
responsiveness of the brain’ s stress circuits. We also know that the
mediators of our stress system, such as the stress hormone norepinephrine,
can profoundly alter gut microbial behavior , making them more aggressive
and dangerous.
One of the first clues as to the possible influence of gut microbes on our
emotions arose from experime nts on so-called germ-free mice, and the
majority of published studies about gut microbes and the brain  have relied
on this approach . Unlike animals raised under normal conditions, who are
exposed to microbes from food, air, the people that look after them, and
their own feces, germ-free animals are born and bred in completely aseptic
conditions—environments with no microbes at all. Scientists breed germ-
free mice by delivering baby mice by cesarean section, then immediately
transferring them  to isolated spaces where all incoming air, food, and water
are sterilized. After these anima ls grow up in this sterile world, scientists
study their behavior and biology and compare them to genetically identical
animals raised under normal conditions. Behaviors or brain biochemistry
that differ between the two groups of animals can then be considered to be
dependent on normal gut microbiota.
Not long after these animals were first bred, investigators observed that
as adults they overrespond to stressful stimuli by producing more of the
stress hormone corticosterone (as mentioned earlier , it’s the rat equivalent
of cortis ol, the human stress hormone). When the researchers transplanted
beneficial micro biota into these animals’  guts at an early age, they could
reverse the exaggerated response to stress. However , such a beneficial
effect of gut microbial treatmen t was no longer observed when given to the
adult animals. These experiments revealed that gut microbes can influence
the development of the brain’ s stress response at an early age.
If you take a litter of mice, separated them at birth into two groups, and
raise one of the groups germ-f ree, the two groups of siblin gs differ in a
surprisingly wide range of measures. The germ-free mice are less sensitive
to pain and less social when interacting with their peers. In addition,
biochemical and molecular mechanisms in the brain and in the gut are
altered compared with normal mice. For example, Sven Pettersson’ s
research group at the Karolinsk a Institute, in Sweden, showed that germ-
free mice showed less anxiety-l ike behavior than normally raised animals,
as well as altered expression of genes involved in nerve-cell-signaling brain
regions implicated in motor control and anxiety-like behavior . But when the
germ-free mice were exposed to gut microbiota early in life, they displayed
none of these abnormal biochemical abnormalities. Pettersson and his
colleagues concluded that when gut microbiota colonize the gut, it
somehow initiates the biochemical signaling mechanisms in the brain that
affect emotional behavior .
We have known for some time that different types of stress can
temporarily alter gut microbia l composition, specifically decreasing the
number of lactobacilli in the stool of stressed animals. But data coming
from a different area of research suggests that the effect of stress goes
beyond these temporary chang es in microbial populations. It has been
known for a long time that norepinephrine, a chemical that is released
during times of stress, makes your heart beat faster and your blood pressure
rise. But we have learned only recently that this stress mediator  can also be
released into the inside of your gut, where it can directly commu nicate with
your gut microbes. Several laboratories have shown that norepinephrine can
stimulate the growth of bacter ial pathogens that can cause serious gut
infections, stom ach ulcers, and even sepsis. In addition to the growth-
promoting ability of this stress molecule, it is also able to activ ate genes in
pathogens, making them more aggressive and increasing their odds of
survival in the intestine. Certain gut microbes can even modify
norepinephrine that’s floating around in the gut during stress into a more
powerful form, intensifyin g the effect of the hormone on other microbe s.
All of this mean s that catching a gut infection when you are under severe
stress can land you in serious trouble.
One patient who demonstrates the clinical consequences of this relationship
between stress and gut infectio ns is Mrs. Stone, a fifty-year -old woman I
saw in my clinic. Mrs. Stone had just gone through lengthy , contentious,
and stressful divorce proceeding s to end her twenty-five-year marriage. Her
job as a business executive was highly demanding, requiring eighty-hour
workweeks and lots of travel. She’d never had GI symptoms that she could
recall, but she had recurrent bouts of anxiety and suffered from chronic low
back pain and headaches for most of her life. Mrs. Stone was seriously
stressed, and she knew it.
To give herself a break, she flew from Los Angeles to Cabo San Lucas,
Mexico, for a vacation. The first two days were everything she had hoped
for, and she enjoyed the peace relaxing by the hotel pool.  On her third day
in the scenic Baja beach town, Mrs. Smith went out to eat at a local seafood
place. For the rest of the week she felt miserable, barely leavin g her hotel
room and battling her unrelen ting symptoms of belly cramps, bloating,
nausea, and diarrhea.
Mrs. Stone felt better by the time she returned to Los Angeles,  but she
talked with her primary care doctor anyway . He diagnosed traveler ’s
diarrhea, a common form of gastroenteritis that’s typically  caused by
bacteria in the local water . Mrs. Stone’ s symptoms had already improved by
the time she saw him, and there were no infectious bacteria detectable in
her stool sample, so her doctor  recommended against taking an antibiotic
and assured her that the symptoms would disappear completely in a few
days.
Unfortunately , they didn’ t, and after several weeks of residual
symptoms, including constant bloating, irregular bowel move ments, and
occasional cram ps, Mrs. Stone made an appointment to see me. Since Mrs.
Stone’ s stool tests for infectiou s organisms again turned out negative and
she had never experienced any gastrointestinal symptoms before, I
recommended a colonoscopy . When this endoscopic test turned up nothing
abnormal, I diagnosed postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome.
This syndrome affects approxim ately 10 percent of patients with proven
bacterial or viral gastroenteritis , and it occurs most often in people with
previous symptoms of pain and discomfort anywhere in the body , whose
initial bout of infectious gastroenteritis lasts longer than usual, and who
contract their GI infection when they’re experiencing chronic severe stress.
(If you do contract this disease, know that symptoms typically disappear
over several months, and that the syndrome is treatable with standard IBS
therapies.)
Individuals with these risk factors are more likely than most to develop
postinfectious IBS-like symptoms when a pathogen like enterotoxigenic E.
coli, the most common cause of traveler ’s diarrhea, infects them. This
makes great sense because chronic stress stimulates the growth of many
pathogens, including E. coli, in our gut, and makes them more aggressive. It
also causes the autonomic nervous system in our gut to release stress
signals that can reduce the thickness of the mucus layer lining the colon
wall and make your gut leakier , allowing microbes greater access to the
gut’s immune system by circumventing many of our gut’s defensive
strategies. This chain of events results in a longer -lasting intestinal immune
activation and prolonged symptoms.
As we all know , not all stress is bad for us. In contrast to chronic, or
recurrent stress,  acute stress and its associated emotional arousal improve
our performance on difficult tasks, such as taking a test or giving a talk. It
also benefits gut health by strengthening our defenses to gut infections. This
works in multiple ways. Acute stress increases acid production by the
stomach in response to stress-related brain signals, which makes it more
likely that invad ing microbes from our food will be killed before they reach
our intestine. It also signals the intestine to increase fluid secretion and
expel its contents, including the pathogen. Finally , it increases the secretion
of antim icrobial peptides called  defensins. All these responses are aimed at
defending the integrity of the gastrointestinal tract against potentially
dangerous invaders and shortening the duration of an infection.
But despite these protective effects of acute stress on our gut and its
microbes, too much of it turns the benefits into a liability . Chronic stress
increases your risk of developing gastrointestinal infections, and is likely to
prolong your suffering of symp toms after the infection has cleared. And if
you are suffering from stress-sensitive conditions like IBS or cyclical
vomiting syndrome, chronic stress is one of the main drivers of symptom
severity .
Positive Emotions
We know a lot about the detrimental effects of chronic stress on brain-gut-
microbiome interactions. But do other emotions besides stress, in particular
positive emotions, also affect the microbes in your gut? That is, does
happiness or a sense of well-being elicit dif ferent, beneficial gut reactions?
We’ve seen how each of these emotions and their underlying operating
systems in the brain can be triggered by a distinct chemic al signal—
endorphins when we’re happy , oxytocin when we feel close to our spouse
or childr en, and dopamine when we’re longing for something. When these
chemical switch es trigger the respective operating systems in the brain, it
leads to a distin ct gut reaction with characteristic patterns of contractions,
secretions, and intestinal blood flow .
I suspec t that some of these gut reactions associated with positive
emotions are also associated with the release of distinct chemical messages
to our gut microbes. We already know that serotonin, dopamine, and
endorphins are released into the gut interior , and they would be good
candidates for such positive gut-to-microbe signals. This emotion-related
signaling from brain to gut microbes may alter the behavior of the microbes
in a way that benefits our health and protects us from gut infections. Signals
associated with happiness or affection may prove to increase gut microbial
diversity , improve gut health, and protect us from gut infections and other
diseases.
Other Consequences of Emotions on Gut Microbes
So far, we know only a small part of this fascinating story . We are
beginning to understand how gut microbes can translate information
contained in the food we eat into molecular signals that influence many of
our body ’s organs and tissues, including the brain. We already know that of
the thousands of different metabolites in our bloodstream, up to 40 percent
come from our gut microbes. Moreover , gut reactions to specific emotions
—positive and negative ones—may dramatically alter the mix of
metabolites that gut microbes produce from the food—in other words,
they’ll heavily edit the molecular signals our gut microbes send to the rest
of our body . I expect we’ll learn that those trillions of bacteria in our
intestines, which scientists neglected for so many years, not only are
influenced by our emotions, but also exert a powerful influence  not just on
our gut, but on how we think and how we feel.
Can Your Gut Microbes Alter Your Social Behavior?
If our gut micro bes can affect our emotions, and emotions and gut feelings
drive our decisio ns on how to behave, it logically follows that gut microbes
can alter our behavior . And if gut microbes alter our behavior , then could an
abnormal mix of gut microbes lead to abnormal behaviors? And if that’s
true, could replacing abnormal gut microbes with healthy ones improve not
just intestinal problems, but behavior itself?
Jonathan and his mother believed that it just might. Jonathan was
twenty-five years old when the two arrived in my clinic. He had been
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), the current term for
people on the autism spectrum, as well as obsessive-compulsive disorder
and chronic anxiety . Like many people with ASD, Jonathan had always
suffered from a range of gastrointestinal problems, which in his case
included abdominal bloating, pain, and constipation.
Jonathan’ s bloating symptoms got much worse after he received several
courses of broad-spectrum antibiotics, suggesting that altered gut
microbiota may have played a role when his gastrointestinal symptoms
flared up. Like many patients with ASD, he had already tried several diets,
including a gluten-free diet and a dairy-free diet, without any lasting
benefit. His unusual day-to-day diet was not helping him, either , but that
wasn’ t surprising. He ate almost no fruits or vegetables, as he disliked both
their texture and smell. Inste ad, his diet consisted largely of refined
carbohydrates, including pancakes, waffles, potatoes, noodles, pizza,
snacks, and protein bars, as well as some meat and chicken.
From surfing the Internet, Jonathan was well informed about health
issues in genera l and about the gut microbiome in particu lar. He had read
about the effects of bad gut bacteria and parasites on the GI system, and he
was convinced that his gut symptoms were related to the evildoings of a
parasite in his gut. He had recently begun cognitive behaviora l therapy to
treat these phobias and obsessions, and the therapy involved exposure to
food he disliked . This caused him a considerable amount of anxiety and
stress, and I suspected that this transient stress might have been worsening
his gastrointestinal symptoms.
I requested a detailed analysis of the microbiota in his stool through the
American Gut Project, a crowd-funded research project that’s obtaining
fecal samples from thousands of ordinary people to learn more  about how
diet and lifestyle shape our gut microbiota. A series of studies in recent
years has suggested that patients on the autism spectrum may have an
altered mix of gut microbes relative to individuals without ASD symptoms,
including propo rtionally more of a bacteria group known as Firmicutes and
less of a group called Bacteroidetes. Patients with irritable bowel syndrome
exhibit a similar pattern. Jonathan’ s analysis revealed that he had the same
pattern, and that he had fewer bacteria known as Proteobacteria and
Actinobacteria than the averag e American. However , since he had an
unusual diet, suffered from anxiety and stress, and also had IBS-like
symptoms, we had no way of knowing if it was his ASD, his IBS, or his
unique eating habits that were responsible for his altered mix of gut
microbes.
Among other questions, Jonat han and his mother wanted to know
whether Jonath an should consider under going a fecal microbial
transplantation or take probiotics to change his microbiome to help with his
psychological and gastrointestinal symptoms. They asked becau se news of a
recent animal study had spread like wildfire through the autism community ,
igniting a great deal of hope in these experimental therapies.
Up to 40 percent of patients with a diagnosis of ASD suffer from
gastrointestinal symptoms, mostly altered bowel habits and abdominal pain
and discomfort, and many of these patients meet diagnostic criteria for
irritable bowel syndrome. In addition, people with ASD have other
abnormalities in their gut-microbiome-brain axis. They commonly have
elevated blood levels of the brain-gut signaling molecule serotonin.
(Remember that more than 90 percent of this molecule is store d in the gut
and that serotonin-containing gut cells are in close communication with the
vagus nerve and the brain.) And in patients with this disorde r, their gut
microbiota composition is altered, as are some metabolites in their blood.
In one of the best and most influential animal studies done yet, Sarkis
Mazmanian and Elaine Hsiao of the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), in Pasadena, injected pregnant mice with a substance that mimics
viral infection and activates their immune system. Young mice born of such
mothers exhibit a range of altered behaviors that resemble those of people
with ASD, including anxiety-lik e behavior , stereotypic repetitiv e behaviors,
and compromised social interactions. For this reason, this so-called
maternal immune activation model is a valid animal model for autism.
The Caltech investigators found that the young mice exhibited changes
in their gut and the gut microbiota: an imbalanced mix of gut microbes, a
leakier intestine, and greater engagement of the gut-based immune system.
The investigator s identified a particular gut microbial metabolite that was
closely related to a metabolite that had previously been ident ified in the
urine of children  with ASD. When they gave this metabolite to healthy mice
born to mothers  whose immune system had not been activated, those mice
had the same behavioral abno rmalities as mice born to mothers whose
immune systems had. Most intriguing, when they transplanted the stool of
the abnormal mice into germ-free mice that behaved normally , the
transplanted animals behaved abnormally . This strongly suggested that
transplanted stool from the affected animals produced a metabolite that
could reach the brain and alter the behavior of healthy mice. Most important
for people with autism spectrum disorders, they could make several (though
not all) of the autism-like behav iors disappear by treating the affected mice
with human intestinal bacteria called Bacter oides fragilis .
This carefully designed study garnered a lot of attention and excitement
not only in the scientific comm unity , but also among parents of autistic
children and among companies eager to develop novel therapies for this
devastating disorder . Jonathan and his mother were among those who
learned about the study , and they asked me whether Jonathan should
consider under going a fecal microbial transplantation or taking probiotics to
help with his psychological and gastrointestinal symptoms.
I explained to the patient that several ongoing studies in human  patients
with ASD will be able to answer his questions definitively within the next
couple of years.  It would be a tremendous scientific breakthrough if even a
subset of affected ASD patients showed symptom improvement with such
therapies. But even before these  results are known, there are several things I
was able to recommend to alleviate some of his symptoms. It is important
to remember that there are several factors that contribute to Jonathan’ s
gastrointestinal symptoms. First, he chooses food based on its texture rather
than its taste, resulting in a highly restricted diet avoiding many plant-based
foods. Second, he consumes a lot of processed food. Third, his high anxiety
levels and stress sensitivity alter his gastrointestinal contractions and
secretions and increase the leakiness of his gut.
My treatment plan targeted both his brain and his gut: Our dietitian
worked with him to help him gradually change his diet from being highly
restricted to a more balanced diet, including fruits, vegetables, and a range
of ferm ented products (including fermented dairy products, probiotic-
enriched soft drinks, kimchi, sauerkraut, different cheeses), all of which
contain different species of lactobacilli and bifidobacteria. I suggested a
trial of herbal laxatives, such as low doses of rhubarb root or aloe vera
preparations to treat his constip ation. And last but not least, we taught the
patient self-relaxation exercises such as abdominal breathing and strongly
recommended he continue his ongoing cognitive behavioral therapy for his
phobias and increased anxiety level.
When Jonathan returned two months later his gastrointestinal symptoms
were much improved. He had increased the variety of foods he was willing
to eat, and he was able to have normal bowel movements. He was no longer
obsessing about evil parasites  in his gut, but was more interested in
understanding how his diet can influence the behavior of his gut microbiota,
and how this interaction could improve his GI symptoms.
Toward a New Theory of Emotions
Long before anybody knew about the complexity of gut microbes, gut
sensations, and their effects on the brain, two prominent nineteenth-century
scholars formulated the first comprehensive theory of emotions. The
American philosopher , psychologist, and physician William James and the
Danish physicia n Carl Lange proposed in the mid-1880s that emotions arise
from our cognitive appraisal of bodily sensations—that is, interoceptive
information from  our organs as they engage in intense activity , such as a
rapid heartbeat, a growling stomach, a spastically contracted colon, or rapid
breathing. This theory , called the James-Lange theory of emotion, is famous
among psychol ogists, though of course few people today believe that
emotions arise entirely from bodily sensations.
In 1927, the renowned physiologist Walter Cannon, at Harvard
University , refuted the James-Lange theory with an extensive body of
empirical data, proposing a brain-based theory in which the activity in
specific brain regions such as the amygdala and the hypothalamus
responding to environmental stimuli generated the emotional experience.
Even though we know now that these brain regions are in fact essential in
generating emot ions, Cannon did not have access to the powerful brain-
imaging tools we have at our disposal today . Thus he could not have known
about the chemical- and nerve-mediated feedback systems to the brain. Nor
could he have had any idea about the prominent role of the gut and the gut
microbes in this interoceptive system.
It was not until modern-day neuroscientists, including Antonio Damasio
and Bud Craig, came up with anatomically based theories about brain-body
loops composed  of both sensory and executive components that the old
theories were replaced by a unifying concept of how our emotions are
generated and modulated.
Craig extensively studied the neuroanatomy of pathways that carry
information from the body to the brain, or interoceptive information. Based
on these studies, he proposed that every emotion has two closely connected
components: a sensory compon ent (including gut feelings) and an action
component (including gut reactions). The sensory component is an
interoceptive image of the body that forms in the insular cortex from a
myriad of neuronal signals from various parts of the body , including the GI
tract. This imag e is always linked to an action—a motor response that is
sent back to the body from a different region of the brain, the cingulate
cortex. This sets up a circular loop between the body and the brain.
According to Craig’ s theory , the purpose of every emotion is to maintain
balance of the entire or ganism.
Over the course of three books, neurologist and author Antonio
Damasio elegantly formulated the somatic marker hypothesis that he
introduced in Descartes’  Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.
According to Damasio’ s theory , we have so-called body loops that consist
of signals traveling from the brain to the body and back. This information
about the body’ s response to an emotional state is stored as rich,
unconscious memories of bodily states, such as muscle tension, rapid
heartbeat, and shallow breathin g. While Damasio said little in his theory
about the prominent role of the GI tract in this process his pioneering work
and publications fundamentally changed our biological understanding of
emotions and emotional feelings.
The “hidden island” part of the brain, the insular cortex, discussed in
more detail in the next chapter , can and does retrieve this somatic marker
information. Our brains can retrieve the edited video clips of how we felt
when we felt vivid emotions, including the motivations that drove us to
respond. They can also use archived video clips from memo ry to create
states of disgust, happiness, and craving without having to go through the
lengthy brain-gu t loop. Thus, when we experience an emotion as an adult,
the brain does not need to feel sensations that describe what’ s actually
happening in the body . Instead, it simply responds to a cue by accessing its
library of emoti onal videos to generate a feeling. The videos in this library
may have been recorded during infancy or adolescence as true gut
reactions, for example the gut contractions associated with a feeling of
anger . They’re reported back to the brain as gut sensations and stored in the
library as gut feelings such as nausea, well-being, satiation, hunger , and
more. These gut feelings can be accessed for a lifetime, instantaneously .
It is only in the last decade that the exponential growth in our
understanding of the gut microbiota and their interactions with the gut and
the brain has forced us to expand these modern theories and include the gut
microbiota as an essential third component in an expanded theory of
emotion. This theory postulates that our basic brain-based emotional
circuitry is largely genetically determined, present at birth, and
epigenetically modified during early life. However , the full development of
emotions and gut reactions requires an extensive lifelong learning process
by which we train and fine-tu ne our brain-gut-microbiome system. Our
unique personal  development, lifestyle, and eating habits all fine-tune our
emotion-generating machinery , creating a vast database in the brain that
stores highly personal information.
It turns out that our gut microb iota play a critical role in this process,
allowing us to generate very personalized patterns of emotion s. It acts on
our emotions primarily through the metabolites it produces. There are some
8 millio n micro bial genes in the gut—400 times more than in the human
genome. Even more astonishin g, we humans differ very little from each
other genetically , sharing more than 90 percent of our genes, but the
assortment of microbial genes in our guts differs dramatically , and only 5
percent of them are shared between any two individuals. The gut
microbiome adds a whole new dimension of complexity and possibilities to
our brain-gut emotion-generating machinery .
FIG. 5. THE CLOSE LINK OF  THE GUT  MICROBIOME-BRAIN AXIS WITH THE
EXTERNAL  WORLD
The gut-brain axis is not only involved in regulatory loops within the body (immune and
endocrine systems) but it is also closely linked to the world around us. The brain responds to
various psychosocial influences, wher eas the gut and its microbiome respond to what we eat,
which medications we take, and to any infectious organisms. The entire system functions like a
super computer which  integrates vast amounts of information from within our bodies and from
the outside world we live in, to generate optimal digestive and brain functions.
Because our gut microbiota appear so central to the way we sense
emotion, anythi ng that modifies the metabolic activity of the microbiota,
including stress, diet, antibiotics , and probiotics, can in principle modulate
the developmen t and responsiveness of your emotion-generat ing circuits.
For example, could the geogra phic differences in emotionality  we see in
people living in different parts of the world be related to geographic
differences in diets and in gut microbial function? If the proposed new
theory of emoti ons is correct, the answer is yes. While future  studies are
required to confirm such conne ctions, we can say the following: while the
basics of emotions could probably still be generated in an imaginary brain
in a jar, complet ely isolated from the gut and the body , such a brain would
have a very limited repertoire of emotional experiences. I stron gly feel that
it is the engagement of the gut, and its microbiome, that plays a major role
in deter mining the intensity , duration, and uniqueness of our emotional
feelings.
CHAPTER
7
UNDERSTANDING INTUITIVE DECISION
MAKING
Many of the decis ions we make in life are grounded in logic, the product
of thoughtful and careful consid eration. On the other hand, there are those
choices you make without any real analysis or considered reason. Such
choices are often made without  conscious awareness, as when you decide
what to eat, what to wear , or what movie to watch.
In his bestselling book Thinking, Fast and Slow , psychologist Daniel
Kahneman, co-w inner of the 2002 Nobel Prize for economics, suggests that
intuitive decisio n making is the “secret author of many of the choices and
judgments [we] . . . make.” The idea that you can make decisions about
what is best for you based on intuition or gut feelings—as opposed to
donning a rational thinking cap—is central to the human condition.
In fact, that kind of nonrational decision making has played a central
role in my own life. When I was seventeen years old, I worked after school
at the family business, my parents’  confectionery shop in the Bavarian Alps.
It was an idyllic place to grow up, in the middle of a major skiing and
hiking area, and only a few hours’  drive from Italy. The shop was founded
by my great-gra ndfather in 1887 and it had been owned and run by my
family ever since. As a teenager , I made pastries and cakes for all kinds of
occasions and particularly loved  whipping up fancy chocolates into exotic
shapes and sizes. It was there that I learned to associate certain aromas with
different season s and holidays, laying the basis (without any conscious
awareness on my part) for my future career in studying the intricate
dialogue between food, the gut, and the brain.
When it was time to decide about college, I agonized for months
between becoming a fifth-gene ration confectioner or pursuing a career in
science and medicine. On the one side, there were the attractions of taking
over a well-established and lucrative business—staying connected to a
closely knit community , living near friends and family , and being able to
spend my free time in the town’ s beautiful landscape. There were also the
expectations of my father , who had always planned that I would continue
the proud family tradition. On the other hand, I felt pulled in a totally
different direction: a rejection of traditions and routines, a love for reading
books, in particular those dealin g with psychology , philosophy , and science,
and an insatiable curiosity abou t the scientific underpinnings of the mind.
Unable to choose based on a list of pros and cons, I began for the first time
in my life to listen to my gut feelings.
Ultimately , to the great disappo intment of my father , I decided to leave
the family business behind and begin my studies in Munich. When I
finished medical school several years later, another gut-based decision
pulled me even farther away from home and from the established career
path of a Germa n university professor , when I rejected a coveted residency
training position  at the university hospital in Munich and joined a research
institute in Los Angeles, the Center for Ulcer Research and Education,
known by its acronym CURE. The center had become a magnet for
researchers from  around the world interested in learning about the gut-brain
dialogue. After the first few days in the lab, it became very clear that my
new activities—purifying and testing various molecules from pig intestines
we collected in the slaughterhouse—had none of the charms of the
chocolate factory back home.
However , I became fascinated  with my new work when I slowly
realized that the implications of my research weren’ t limited to the gut: the
identical signaling molecules we were isolating from the pig intestines were
also found in the brain, and they were also used by a wide range of plants,
animals, exotic frogs, and yes, even bacteria, to communicate with each
other—a fact that has become  known in science-speak as interkingdom
signaling. Little did I know that this area of brain-gut communication would
occupy my scientific interest for the rest of my medical career .
While my gut feelings had a profound influence on my life, the reality is
that the stakes were not all that high. I was given many opportunities in
those early years to explore different paths—and chances are, I could have
been happy with whatever I’d chosen. But for others, gut decisions can be a
matter of life and death.
On September 26, 1983, a young duty officer in the Soviet Air Defense
Forces, Stanislav Petrov , was stationed in a bunker outside Moscow when
Soviet satellites mistakenly detected five U.S. ballistic missiles heading
toward the USSR. Even though alarm bells sounded, and a screen flashed
“LAUNCH,” Petrov made the monumental decision that the alarm was
false and refuse d to confirm the incoming strike. Had he acted upon the
“rational” procedures that were put in place for such a situation (like many
of his military colleagues might have done), his retaliatory strike would
have been followed by a U.S. retaliation, in all likelihood causing many
millions of deaths.
Petrov initially gave several rational explanations for his decision,
including his belief that an attack by five missiles didn’ t make sense. Any
U.S. strike would be massive, with hundreds of missiles. Moreover , the
launch detection system was new and, in his view , not yet wholly
trustworthy . Finally , ground radar failed to confirm the attack.
However , in a 2013 interview , when it was safer to make such an honest
statement, Petro v said he was never sure that the alarm was erroneous, but
that he made his decision on “a funny feeling in my gut.”
People the world over refer to gut-based decisions in a similar  way. It
does not seem to matter what type of decision is being made —political,
personal, or professional, whom  to marry , what college to attend, what
house to buy. Presidents ultimately make gut-based decisions about war and
peace, affecting millions of peop le, after they have listened to their advisors
and carefully weighed the optio ns on the table. If it’s important, humans
listen to their gut.
Gut feelings and intuitions can be viewed as opposite sides of the same
coin. Intuition is your capacity for quick and ready insight. Often you know
and understand things instantly , without rational thought or inference. You
feel when something’ s fishy . You sense when you have an instant personal
bond with a stranger . You are positive that the charismatic politician on
television is lying through his teeth. Gut feelings reflect an extensive and
often deeply personal body of wisdom that we have access to, and that we
trust more than the advice provided by family members, highly paid
advisors, and self-declared experts or social media.
So exactly what is a gut feeling ? What’ s its biological basis? And what
role do the signals originating  in the gut have in the generation of gut
feelings? In other words, when does a gut sensation become an emotional
feeling?
Some answers can be found in the extraordinary work of Bud Craig, a
neuroanatomist who has advanced our understanding of the circuitry that
allows your brain to listen to your body and vice versa. His ideas, laid out in
a recent book, How Do You Feel? An Inter oceptive Moment with Your
Neur obiological Self, have played an important role in my own research,
which looks at how your brain listens to your gut and the microbes that live
in it (and vice versa).
The complex neurobiological process by which our brain constructs
subjective gut feelings from the vast amount of information it receives in
the form of gut sensations 24/7 is the foundation for the subjective
experience of how we feel the mom ent we awake, after we eat a delicious
meal, or endure a prolonged fast. There is growing evidence to suggest that
the constant stream of interocep tive information from the gut (including the
chatter of our gut microbiota) may play a crucial role in the generation of
our gut feelings, thereby influencing our emotions.
Feelings (including gut feelings ) are sensory signals that tap into your
brain’ s so-called salience system. Salience is the level to which something
in the environment can catch and retain one’s attention, because it is
important or noticeable; someth ing that stands out. A bee buzzing around
your head while  you read this chapter may command more of your attention
than the content s of the chapter , in particular because there is the potential
threat of the bee stinging you. A thunderstorm outside may have similar
salience and be equally effective to focus your attention away from the
book, while background music playing at a low volume, or the sounds of a
gentle breeze outside, may go unnoticed. The brain’ s salience system
appraises the relevance of any signal regardless of whether it comes from
your body or from the environment, to the point where the signal enters our
attentional processes and our consciousness.
FIG. 6. HOW  THE BRAIN CONSTRUCTS GUT  FEELINGS FROM GUT  SENSA TIONS
Signals arising from the gut and its microbiome, including chemical, immune, and mechanical
signals, are encoded by a vast array of receptors in the gut wall and sent to the brain via nerve
pathways (in particul ar the vagus nerve) and via the bloodstr eam. This information  in its raw
format is received in the back portion of the insular cortex and then processed and integrated
with many other brain systems. We only become awar e of a small portion of this information in
the form of gut feelings. Even though they originate in the gut, gut feelings are created from the
integration of many other influences, including memory , attention, and affect.
High-salience events related to gut sensations (including nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea) are usually accompanied by emotional feelings of
discomfort and sometimes pain, alerting us that something important is
going on that requires attention and a behavioral response. However , gut
feelings can also be associated with positive gut sensations, such as feeling
good and satiated after a nice meal, or the pleasant sensation experienced in
the pit of the stomach in a fully  relaxed state. The threshold for what your
brain appraises as salient is influenced by many factors, including your
genes, the quality and nature of your early life experiences, your current
emotional state (the more anxio us you are, the lower will be the salience
threshold), your mindfulness of body sensations, and your vast memories of
emotional moments, acquired over a lifetime. But remember , in terms of
signals originating in our digestive system, most of the time your salience
system operates below the level of conscious awareness. Trillions of
sensory signals rise up from your gut every day and are processed in your
brain’ s salience network, yet most don’t attract your attention. They remain
below the surface, content to percolate into your subconscious.
How does the salience system  decide which one of these  signals
becomes a consciously perceived gut feeling? One brain region  that plays a
crucial role in this process is the insular cortex, which is the central hub of
the brain’ s salience network. The insula, as it is also known, was given its
name because of its location as “a hidden island” beneath the temporal
cortex. In a theory based on neuroscientist Bud Craig’ s paradi gm-shifting
concepts and a wealth of scientific data, different regions of this hidden
island in our brain are thought to play specific roles in recording,
processing, evaluating, and responding to interoceptive information.
According to the current understanding of how the brain handles this
tremendous task, the representation of the primary image of our body is first
encoded in a netork of nuclei located in the lowest part of the brain, the so-
called brainstem . From there, much of this information reaches the back
part of the insulaar cortex. There our perception of this image is comparable
to a grainy black -and-white picture that reflects the state of every cell in our
body , yet is barely visible to the naked eye.
Actually , our brains are not really interested in our comments  on this
information, so this raw image is not intended for our viewing pleasure. The
information contained in it is relevant mainly for routine, steady-state
feedback by the brain to the body region where the information originated
—in our case, the gastrointesti nal tract. In theory , the Nation al Security
Agency handles data the same way. In a perfect world, no one would access
any of the agency’ s stored information unless a salience threshold were
breached, alerting security agents to scrutinize telephone, Internet, and
travel patterns.
The insular image is then refin ed, edited, and colored, similar to the
process an actor ’s or actress’ s head shot under goes after a film shoot. What
Craig calls the “re-representatio n” of the interoceptive image of your body
into ever-more-refined image versions can be compared to the process that
is used in profes sional photogra phy. Like a photographer using Photoshop,
the brain uses affective, cognitive, and attentional tools as well as memory
databases of previous experienc es to refine the quality and salience of the
image. As the editing progresses, the brain’ s attentional networks become
more engaged, causing us to become more aware of the image and associate
it with motivational states—that is, a drive to do something in response to
the feeling being generated. It is where your visceral sensations and
gustatory experi ences are sent to in your brain, allowing you to feel the
need to eat or eliminate, rest or run, save energy or expend energy. Once
this process reaches the frontal part of the insular cortex, the image has all
the features of a conscious emotional feeling that describes the state of your
whole body and that we are connecting to our sense of self: feeling well,
feeling nauseated, feeling thirsty , hungry , or satiated, feeling relaxed, or
simply feeling unwell. From a neurobiological viewpoint, these are our true
gut feelings. Despite its central role in this process, it is important to
remember that the insula doesn ’t handle this remarkable task in isolation,
but does it in close interactions with other parts of the brain’ s interoceptive
network. This network includes several nuclei in the brainstem and different
regions of the brain’ s cortex.
But what does our brain do with the myriad gut feelings we have
accumulated over a lifetime? It would hardly make sense that evolution has
come up with such an amazing ly complex data-gathering and processing
system, only to throw the colle cted information away . This library of gut
feelings is composed of an enormous amount of personal and salient
information about each of us that has been collected every second of the
day, 365 days a year. The current scientific thinking is that this information
is stored in an exponentially growing database, analogous to data collection
systems created by companies and government agencies. The data collected
in our brains is about highly personal experiences, our motivational drives,
and our emotional reactions to these experiences, which our brains have
been constructing since birth and maybe even in utero. Even though most
people have paid little attention to this process or though t about its
implications, we will see that it has a great deal to do with gut-feeling-based
decision making.
This stored information repre sents countless positive and negative
emotional states  that we have experienced in our lifetime. For example,
emotional memories may be associated with negative outcomes of decisions
we have made, such as the awful abdominal pain and discomfort I
experienced in Manali. This database archives the butterflies we experience
in our stomachs before a job interview , or the knot that forms in the pit of
our belly when we are really  angry or personally disappointed. Such
markers may also be associated with the pleasure of a delicious meal or the
intense feelings of romantic love, or the feeling of empowerment.
Individual Differences
Pretend you are a participant in an experiment designed to look at the
relationship between interoception and emotional intelligence. You lie down
in a brain scanner , put on headp hones, and place your left middle finger on
a pad that moni tors your heart rate. Your right hand rests on another pad
with two buttons. As the scanner monitors your brain activity , you listen
through the headphone to several series of ten beeps. After each ten-beep
sequence there is a pause and you are asked to make a choice: press one
button if you think the beeps were in time with your own heartbeats, or
press the other button if you think the beeps were slightly out of sync with
your heart. You will hear these sequences repeated, sometimes in sync,
sometimes not. Can you tell the dif ference?
When this exper iment was carried out several years ago on nine women
and eight men, four subjects were supremely confident abou t when the
pulse was synchronous or async hronous with their hearts. They could feel
the difference, accurately , every time. Two subjects were veritably heart
blind. They never had a clue about whether the pulses were in or out of
sync, and could only guess at random. The others fell in between.
Brain scans revealed significant activity in several brain regions of all of
the participants, notably the right frontal insula. It showed the greatest
activity in those who were best at following their heartbeats. Most
important, these were the people who scored highest on a standardized
questionnaire to probe their empathy levels. So the better you are at
tracking your own heartbeats, the better you are at experienc ing the full
gamut of human emotions and gut feelings. The more viscerally  aware, the
more emotionally attuned you are. Even though this study was done with a
focus on sensations from the heart, there is no reason to doubt that it would
equally apply to the awareness of gut sensations.
Early Development
Gut feelings and moral intuitions have an interesting origin, related to, of all
things, food. Hunger is an early emotion related to surviva l. And it is
foundational to all the gut feelings you experience later in life, including
your sense of right and wrong.
Let me explain with a story . My wife and I recently hosted some close
friends for the weekend, along with their adult daughter and seven-month-
old granddaught er, Lyla, who babbled most of the day. The baby was happy
much of the time, but her smile and obviously good mood were interrupted
whenever she got hungry , tired,  or was about to fall asleep. We now know
that the gut-brain axis at age seven months is a work in progress,
particularly in terms of full brain development and the salience network.
Moreover , gut microbes are not fully established until the end of the third
year of life. Still, Lyla’s prim itive salience network was tuned to gut
sensations relate d to hunger and this led to lusty crying that got her the milk
she wanted. Once she was fed, Lyla’s initial aversive gut feeling was
quickly replaced  by one of comfort and pleasure, triggered by new gut
sensations related to satiation.
My main point: gut feelings related to hunger comprise your earliest
signals about what is good and bad in the world, and they begin at birth.
The gut feeling of an empty stomach may be a newborn child’ s first
negative proto-emotion, triggering an uncontrollable craving  for food.
Similarly , the satiated feeling that follows the consumption of breast milk—
which is full of prebiotics and probiotics—is likely the earliest  experience
of feelin g good. Other positive gut feelings include gentle touch (part of
interoception) with Mom, as well as warmth and comforting sound.
The signals sent from your gut to your brain, the gut sensations, play a
key part in these early experiences and, by extension, your ability to
differentiate good from bad. When your stomach was empty , it released a
hormone, ghrelin, that led to an urgent feeling of hunger . This sensation,
coupled with a strong motivatio nal drive, would be the basis of other bad
gut feelings.
Gut feelings can also be associated with positive sensations, such as the
warmth of feeling full after a good meal, the pleasant sensation in the pit of
your stomach while practicing abdominal breathing, or smelling chocolate
aromas in a family confectionery .
The cycling experience in infan cy of feeling full or hungry— good or
bad—may lay the foundation for the moral judgments of good and bad that
emer ge into gut feelings later in life. In other words, your gut registered
how well your needs were met or not met in infancy . A hungry baby left in
its crib to cry for an hour perceives the world very differently from the baby
who is quickly picked up, cradled, and fed. Thus your earliest gut feelings
serve as a model for “what the world is like and what I must do to survive
in it.”
Sigmund Freud intuited as much when he developed his pragmatic
understanding of primary motivational forces. The great psychiatrist linked
psychological and character development to the infant’ s fixation on the
“entry and exit” regions of the digestive tract—his famous “oral” and
“anal” phases of psychic development. But Freud missed the crucial
contribution of feelings, constructed by the brain based on sensory
information coming from the entire digestive tract and its reside nt microbes
—something we are only now beginning to appreciate.
How do the vast assemblies of gut microbes contribute to these early
feelings of “good” and “bad”? Recall that your body is host to trillions of
microbes that outnumber all of the human cells in your body . They live
pretty much everywhere—on your skin, between your teeth, in saliva, in
your stomach, and—most relevant to gut feelings—in your gastrointestinal
tract. Your gut is home to more than a thousand microbial species that are,
at multiple levels, talking to your brain.
Based on emer ging evidence about the development of the gut microbial
ecology during the first three years of life, we can make some intriguing
speculations. It’s plausible from animal studies that gut microbes influence
the emotional state and develop ment of infants the world over, from crying
to cooing.
How? Some of it has to do with mother ’s milk, which contains
something akin to Valium. The gut microbes in all infants are adapted to
optimally metab olize the complex carbohydrates in breast milk. One of the
microbes best suited for this is a certain strain of lactobacillus that makes a
metabolite of GABA—a substance that acts on the same brain receptors as
the anxiety-reducing drug Valium. By producing endogenous Valium, a
microbe may help to calm down babies’  emotion-generating system in the
brain, and make them feel good by relieving them of hunger pangs.
Human breast milk also conta ins complex sugars that are not only
essential for the baby’ s developi ng gut microbiome, but may also contribute
to a baby’ s sense of well-being when it’s fed. When newborn rats are fed
sugar water, sweet-taste recepto rs in the gut and mouth generate sensations
that are process ed by the brain . These lead to the release of endogenous
opioid molecules that reduce pain sensitivity , and presumably make rodents
feel pretty good. The same may be true for human infants.
What Makes Our Brains Uniquely Human
In all the talk about what makes humans special, you’ll hear many of the
same arguments . We walk upright. We have opposable thumbs. Our brains
are enormous. We have language. We’re top predators. But there are two
features of our brains that are most relevant to our discussion abou t gut
feelings and intuitive decision making.
The size and complexity of the frontal insula region and the closely
connected prefrontal cortex—the hub of the salience network and the site
where our gut feelings are created, stored, and retrieved—is what most
distinguishes us from all other species. The animals closest to us in terms of
relative size of their anterior insula are some of our simian cousins, in
particular certain species of gorillas, followed by whales, dolphins, and
elephants—all widely recognized for their emotional, social, and cognitive
brain capabilities and, not coincidentally , their Animal Planet popularity .
However , there is another feature particular to the human brain that
you’ve probably  never heard about. Tucked into your right frontal insula
and its associated structures lies a special class of cell found in no other
species except great apes, elephants, dolphins, and whales. Called von
Economo neuro ns (or briefly VENs), after the scientist who first observed
them in 1925, they are big, fat, highly connected neurons that appear to be
in the catbird seat for enabling you to make fast, intuitive judgments.
You can make snap judgments because your brain contains VENs, but
to keep things simple, let’s call them intuition cells. A very small number of
intuition cells showed up in your brain a few weeks before you were born.
Studies suggest that you probably had about 28,000 such cells at birth and
184,000 by the time you were four years old. By the time you reached
adulthood, you had 193,000 intuition cells. An adult ape typically has
7,000.
Intuition cells are more numerou s in your right brain. Your right frontal
insula has 30 percent more than your left insula. Intuition cells appear to be
designed to relay information rapidly from the salience network to other
parts of the brain. They contain  receptors for brain chemicals involved in
social bonds, the expectation of reward under conditions of uncertainty , and
for detecting danger , as well as for certain gut-based signaling molecules
such as serotonin—all ingredien ts of intuition. When you think your luck is
about to change while playing blackjack, these cells are active.
John Allman, a neuroscientist at Caltech and a leading exper t on the
VENs, says that when you meet someone, you create a ment al model of
how that person  thinks and feels . You have initial, quick intuitio ns about the
person—calling on your database of gut feelings, stereotypes, and
subliminal perceptions—which are followed seconds, hours, or years later
by slower , more reasoned judgm ents. We now know that when you make
fast decisions, your frontal insula and anterior cingulate are active. These
areas are also active when you experience pain, fear, nausea, or many social
emotions. When you think something is funny , these same cells fire up,
probably to recalibrate your intuitive judgments in changing situations.
Humor serves to resolve uncer tainty , relieve tension, engender trust, and
promote social bonds.
It is believed that the rapid communication system involving the VENs
may have evolved in mamma ls living in complex social organizations,
enabling them to rapidly respond and adjust to quickly changing social
situations through gut-based decision making. Because of their proposed
role in social behavior , intuition, and empathy , it has been suggested that
VEN abnormalities may contribute to the pathophysiology of autism
spectrum disorders, including the compromised ability of these  patients to
empathize and interact socially . Although there’ s currently no direct
scientific evidence to support this speculation, it’s conceivable that the
development of the VEN system in the brain is related to altered
composition and function of the gut microbiota during the first few years in
life, including the signals they send to the brain. Altered gut-brain
communications have long been implicated in some forms of autism, and
recent experime nts using a mouse model of autism have identified altered
gut microbe-to-brain signaling as a possible mechanism underlying these
animals’  autism-like behaviors.
DO ANIMALS HAVE GUT FEELINGS?
As humans, we take for grante d our social emotions such as
embarrassment, guilt, shame, and pride, and assume that
animals, especia lly those we live with, must share the same
feelings. Dog lovers swear that their canine companions
experience emotions like shame , jealousy , anger , and affection
in the same way we do.
However , if we go strictly by the anatomy of the brain,
animals do not have the capacity to experience these emotions;
their brains just aren’ t wired that way. The self-awareness of
emotion conferred on humans by the anterior insula and its
interactions with other cortical brain regions, in particular the
prefrontal corte x, is unique. Dogs do have insulas but their
frontal aspects are rudimentary . Internally generated sensations,
including those from the gut, are integrated in the base of their
brains and in subcortical emotional centers, rather than in the
frontal insula. Dogs and other pets are clearly emotional but not
self-aware, so no matter how human their emotional expressions
appear , they are not in the same league with you, not matter
how hard this is to accept.
Building Your Personal Google
Imagine that our memories of emotional moments are stored in our brains
as tiny YouTube video clips. These videos contain not only the visuals of
any given moment, but also the associated emotional, physical, attentional,
and motivational components. We rarely remember the dates  or specific
circumstances of such events. Billions of these clips, or “somatic markers,”
are held in the biological equivalent of miniaturized servers in our brain and
“annotated” (linked) with motivational states: a negative marker is
associated with an unpleasant feeling and with the motivation al drive of
avoidance, whereas a positive marker is associated with a feeling of well-
being and a motivational behavior to seek it out.
When we make a decision based on our gut feelings, the brain accesses
the vast video library of emotional moments in our brains, like a Google
search. In other words, you don’t have to go through the time-consuming
process of consciously considering all the possible positive and negative
consequences of every particular decision you make. When faced with the
need for action,  your brain predicts how a given response will make you
feel, based on its emotional memories of what took place when you were
confronted with other , similar situations throughout your life. This
probabilistic process then guides you away from responses that are likely to
make you feel bad—that is, anxious, pained, sick, sad, and so on—and
toward response s that are linked to memories of feeling comfort able, happy ,
cared for, etc. Besides allowing you to make decisions more quickly , this
mechanism lets you benefit from the past lessons without the psychological
burden of relivi ng them. If you were to constantly revisit and relive your
painful and unpleasant experiences, you’d go insane.
WOMEN’S INTUITION
In my experienc e with patients, many women seem to be better
at listening to their gut feelings and making intuitive decisions
than men are. The growing interest in identifying sex-related
differences in emotional processing and in the prevalence of
chronic pain conditions led to a series of studies funded by the
National Institutes of Health aimed at identifying sex-related
differences in brain responses to painful and emotional stimuli.
For a variety of political and convenience reasons, the study
of such biological differences between women and men has
been largely neglected, as it is automatically assumed that the
female brain responds to such stimuli, as well as to medications,
in the same way as the male brain. However , research by our
group and others suggests that women tend to show greater
sensitivity to the brain’ s salience and emotional arousal systems
attuned to physical feelings like abdominal pain and emotional
feelings like sadness or fear, than men do. One explanation of
these differences may have to do with the fact that women store
memories of physiologically painful or uncomfortable states
such as menstruation, pregnancy , and childbirth. When
expecting a potentially painful experience, the female brain has
a more extensi ve somatic marker library to go by, and its
salience system may have greater input from such memories
than the male system.
Are Decisions Based on Our Gut Feelings Always
Right?
If what we know or reasonably suspect about gut feelings is true, then
shouldn’ t gut-feeling-based decisions be the best decisions?
Yes and no. While gut feelings are more informed by our own
experiences and learned knowledge than we may have ever considered, they
are also easily corrupted by a variety of outside influences, including
traumatic experiences, mood disorders, and advertising messages.
For example, TV programming is full of commercials targeted directly
at your gut feelings, whether the aim is to motivate you to eat a hambur ger,
go on a diet, or take a medica tion. These cleverly designed commercials
capture your attention by presen ting images, including an implicit promise
of reward, that are embedded smoothly and effortlessly into your stored
library of gut feelings and experiences.
Take, for example, the advertising slogan for a brand of peanut butter
that says, “Choosy moms choo se Jif.” Being choosy with regard to your
children’ s health  is a gut feeling that most parents have; it’s laudable.
Advertisers and other influenc es can hijack such basic gut feelings by
taking advantage of the fact that you’re busy. You may consolidate and
simplify inform ation. Your gut-based desire to “be choosy when feeding
your children” combines with the slogan “choosy moms choose Jif” in your
brain to form the imperative “choose Jif,” which is then mistaken for a gut
feeling. So the question becomes not whether you can trust your gut
feelings, but how you can learn to accurately identify what your true gut
feelings are. Although the circuitry for making instantaneous gut-based,
intuitive decisions evolved to enable you to live and navigate in complex
societies, your challenge today is to use your gut to understand what is
meaningful to you.
Our ability to make gut-feeling-based predictions and decisions is a by-
product of evolution; in a dangerous world filled with life-threatening
situations, a systemic bias toward assuming a high likelihood of bad
outcomes can provide a significant survival advantage. Today , however ,
such a system has become maladaptive in most parts of the developed
world, where life-threatening physical threats have largely been  replaced by
daily psychological stressors—the result being that our negatively biased
gut-based decisions now result primarily in unhappiness and negative health
outcomes.
A good example of this is the story of Frank. He had to force himself to
go to lunch meetings with his clients, because his brain’ s predictions
regarding what would happen in an unfamiliar restaurant created so much
anxiety and related gastrointesti nal symptoms that he was unable to focus
on the meeting. This phenomenon is known as catastrophizing, which
simply means that your brain makes the (wrong) gut-feeling-based
prediction that the worst possible outcome (in this case, severe digestive
symptoms) will occur . The instant Frank found out about a new
appointment, his intuitive, negatively biased prediction of future events in
the restaurant kicked in, preventing him from rationally assessing the
situation. Catastrophizing is also a common trait in patients suffering from
depression or chronic pain, whose attention is narrowed to only negative
stimuli. Some people with these  conditions have completely lost the ability
to make gut-feeling-based decisions that are good for their well-being.
HOW WE DECIDE
When it comes to buying a bottle of wine, there are three types
of strategies, depending on your decision-making strategy .
First are the linear , rational types who base their decision on
what they have learned in a wine -tasting class (the best years for
that particular varietal, the amou nt of sugar added, the age, and
so on) or from reading the newsletter published by a famous
wine master . Gut sensation experts, on the other hand, make
their decisions based on a natur al or trained ability to detect an
astonishing number of differen t flavors and aromas (ranging
from chocolate to raspberry to cinnamon) when smelling and
tasting a particular wine. Finall y, there are the intuitive types,
the gut feeling experts, who over their lifetime have
accumulated a vast library of emotional memories related to
wine consumpt ion. These memories may include enjoyable
moments experienced in a small town in Tuscany or Provence,
or drinking a simple bottle of red wine with delicious food in
the company of good friends. Memories may also include the
fragrance of the surrounding lavender fields and the
thunderstorm that drove everybody from the outdoor restaurant
inside. The gut feelings generated and stored during these
pleasant experie nces contain not only the actual taste of the
wine (the gut sensation), but also the context (beautiful scenery)
and the feeling state (being relaxed, happy , or in love).
When you watch the three types making a decision about
which wine to buy, the rationa l type will do searches on the
Internet and carefully , logically weigh the price, year, and other
learned informat ion about the wine. The sensory experts may go
to a wine-tasting room to discover the ultimate blend of flavors
and aromas. Meanwhile, the intuitive type will be influenced
primarily by the memories they may have about the particular
part of the world where the wine originated, or about the
occasion at which they shared the wine in good company .
Accessing Your Gut Feelings Through Dreams
If we were able to watch a gut-feeling-based documentary of our lives,
composed of all these indiv idual clips spliced together , we would
presumably witness a fascinating, highly personal biopic, played out in
vivid colors.
But short of such a fantasy , how might we catch a glimpse of the video
library in our minds? Watching our own emotional biopic during waking
hours, when we’re busy dealin g with the challenging world around us,
would be incredibly distracting. A much more plausible time to view such a
movie would be at night, when we are not distracted by work , family , or
friends, and when our body is temporarily offline and won’ t move during
even the scaries t scenes. And in fact, that’s exactly when showtime occurs
for this cinema of the emotions—when we are asleep, or, more specifically ,
when we are absorbed in our dreams.
The experience  of dreaming can often seem as if we are actually
watching a movie, and anybody who is able to remember his or her dreams
will agree that the human brain is a remarkable film director . It is generally
assumed that the most vivid dreams occur during the period of sleep called
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. During REM sleep, your breathing
becomes more rapid, irregular , and shallow , your eyes jerk rapidly in
various directions, and your brain becomes extremely active.  Movies of
particular perso nal relevance play more frequently , and appear in more
colorful and emotional formats.
Brain imaging studies in sleeping subjects demonstrated that the brain
regions activated during REM sleep include the familiar salience network
regions of the insula and cingulate cortex, along with several emotion-
generating regions—including the amygdala, and regions involved in
memory , such as the hippocamp us and the orbitofrontal cortex—as well as
the brain region essential for experiencing the images, the visua l cortex. At
the same time, brain areas involved in cognitive control and conscious
awareness, including the prefrontal and parietal cortexes, and regions
controlling voluntary movement are turned off. You are paralyzed. This
way, we can experience an uncensored version of our film without worrying
that we’ll fall out of bed when we feel like running away or punching
someone in the face. You cannot enact your dreams, unless you have a rare
sleep disorder .
Interestingly , while our body movements are turned off, the brain-gut-
microbiota axis is more active during sleep than at any other time. The
migrating moto r complex—th e powerful contractions and bursts of
gastrointestinal secretions, discussed in Chapter 2, that pass through our
intestines every ninety minutes when there is no food in our gastrointestinal
tract—are fully activated during sleep, and dramatically change the
environment for our gut microbes (and presumably their metabolic activity)
during this period. Based on what we know today , it is likely that these
contractile wave s are also associated with release of the many signaling
molecules in the gut and with transmission of this infor mation to the brain,
via the many gut-to-brain communication channels. Even though no
scientific studies  have been done  to prove this point, I wouldn’ t be surprised
if such bursts of intense gut- and microbe-to-brain signaling, with all the
neuroactive substances being released during this process, play a role in the
affective coloring of our dreams.
Why is dreaming significant? One proposed theory is that dreaming
during REM sleep helps to integ rate and consolidate various aspects of our
emotional memories. As I’ll discuss later, dream analysis is one way to get
in touch with and learn to trust your gut feelings. While there are many
other hypotheses about the role and importance of dreams, the idea that one
of its functions is to consolidate the emotional memories in the form of gut
feelings that we accumulated during the day fits much of the scientific data
that has been gathered in this field. Some intriguing recent findings, for
example, sugges t that the gut-brain axis, possibly including signals from the
microbiota, plays an important role in the modulation of REM  sleep and
dream states. So the next time you have a late meal just before going to bed,
or get up in the middle of the night to forage in your refrigerato r, you might
think about the unintended effect this may have on your nighttime movie
showing, and the updating of your internal database!
A quarter-centur y ago, at a time when I was overwhelmed by decisions I
had to make about my own life’s direction, I was fortunate to have gone
through Jungian psychoanalysis for several years. Carl Gustav Jung was a
famous psychiatrist at the Burghölzli psychiatric hospital in Zurich,
Switzerland, and a contemporar y of Sigmund Freud. He was the founder of
analytical psychology , an elaborate conceptualization of psychology that
includes such key concepts as a shared (collective) unconscious; universal,
inborn patterns of unconscious images (so-called archetypes) that guide our
behavior; and the concept of individuation, a psychological  process of
integrating opposite psychological tendencies, like introversion and
extroversion. Jung saw dream analysis as the key strategy to get access to
our unco nscious. Today I speculate that the latter process has a lot to do
with getting in touch with, and learning to trust, your gut feelings.
While I had always been fascinated by Jung’ s writings about dream
analyses, I wasn’ t quite ready for the recurrent weekly questio ns from my
therapist regarding the dreams I’d had since our last appointm ent. While I
had begun my therapy looking for practical help on makin g the most
rational decisions about my future, my therapist consistently redirected me
to look inside myself and find the answers from my dreams.
There were weeks when I was terrified, driving to my weekly
appointment without a single dream written down in my journal, facing a
session where there would be nothing to talk about. Over a matter of
months, howeve r, the dreams I was able to remember steadily increased in
their frequency , detail, and intensity . I was amazed at the beauty , story lines,
and complexity of the “inner movies” that I was watching every  night. The
most elaborate of these dream s, associated with the strongest feelings,
turned out to be the ones with the greatest personal meaning. The
combination of writing down my dreams every morning and then reflecting
on them , with or without my therapist, gradually brought me to a point
where I was able to connect with my internal database of emotional
memories, and began trusting my inner wisdom reflected in these dreams
more and more in making important decisions, rather than relying on the
advice of friends and colleagues.
But dream analysis is not the only way to get in touch with your gut
feelings. There are other ways of training yourself to listen to your gut
feelings that are less cumbersome and expensive than Jungian
psychoanalysis. Ericksonian hypnosis is one. Milton Erickson, a famous
hypnotherapist, was a master at putting his patients into a trance by
directing his elaborate, hypnosis- inducing storie s alternatively to the
conscious, rational (left) side of the brain and to the wise, all-knowing
unconscious (right) side of the brain. Over the course of the hypnotic
induction, the subject would come to trust the unconscious side more and
more, while letting go of any attempt to control things throu gh rational,
linear thought mechanisms. Not only is hypnosis a highly effective way of
rapidly switching the brain from an external attentional focus to an
introspective mode, thereby inducing a trance, but repeated sessions of
Ericksonian hypnosis also change the way patients make important
decisions when they are not in a trance state. Over time, many of Erickson’ s
regular subjects  increasingly learned to trust this inner wisdom and make
their decisions accordingly .
The Bottom Line
We use the expression “gut feeling” frequently in our daily conversations,
without realizing that a tremendous amount of cumulative scientific
evidence provides the biological underpinnings for this term. The quality ,
accuracy , and underlying biase s of this gut-brain dialogue vary between
different individuals. Some gut sensations are recorded with high fidelity
and are replayed  in a sublimina l way: Even though they rarely reach our
consciousness, such movies, like dreams, are likely to play an important
role in our background feeling states. In addition, certain individuals seem
to be more sensitive and aware of all signals coming from the gut. They
may view themselves as always  having had a “sensitive stoma ch” or may
have been told by their mothers that they were colicky babies. Some learn
to live with this hypersensitivit y and accept it as part of their personality .
They will tell you that they are more sensitive to food and medications and
will feel butterflies in their stomach when anxious. Others in this group
develop common gastrointestinal disorders such as IBS, as their brain,
flooded by a constant stream of aberrant signals from the gut, generates
inappropriate gut reactions based on the signals received.
By getting in touch with our gut feelings, understanding the role that our
personal collection of gut-based  memories plays in our intuitive decision
making, and keeping in mind that whatever we do to influence the activities
of our gut microbes—through our diet or medication intake—may also
influence our emotions and predictions about the future, we can fully tap
into the vast potential of the gut-microbiota-brain axis.
It seems  strange that given the crucial importance of gut-based decision
making, there is no formal mechanism in place to train and optimize this
remarkable ability. We certainly don’t learn about it in school, and many
parents don’t tell their children to listen to their gut, instead stressing the
importance of thinking things through logically (which, of course, is also a
valuable skill for impulsive adolescents to practice). The ultimate dogma of
modern society is to make rational decisions based on the assumption that
the world is linear and predictable, and that if you have enough information
about the world, you can make the best decisions. I strongly believe that
once we gain a better understanding of the biological underpinnings of
intuitive decision making and accept it as a worthwhile goal to invest our
mental energies in improving these skills, there is a range of strategies we
can embark on to improve our ability and inclination for gut-feeling-based
decision making later in life.
PART 3
HOW TO OPTIMIZE BRAIN-GUT
HEALTH
CHAPTER
8
THE ROLE OF FOOD: LESSONS FROM
HUNTER-GATHERERS
All around the world, food is central to the human social experi ence. We
sit aroun d the holiday table and listen and laugh as family members swap
stories. We meet new friends over dinner , and sometimes they become more
than friends. We hold breakfas t meetings, award luncheons, and potluck
dinners. As often as not, the affairs of human life involve breaking bread
together .
Yet as the pace of modern life has accelerated, our eating habits have
changed. We’ve moved from sit-down meals with the family to fast-food
burgers to frozen entrees to processed snacks to meals that can be ordered at
the touch of a button. Through those decades in the United States, many of
us were haunted  by the feeling that something as central to our existence as
our diet was becoming profoundly unnatural. The enduring and appe aling
backlash to that trend, embod ied in natural food restaurants, farmer ’s
markets, and the slow-food movement, reveals a deeper yearning to find
what we lost in all that modernization—to uncover what was good and
natural and healthy about our sustenance.
How can we recover what we’ve lost? We can start by looking at the
science. Over millions of years , our digestive systems, gut microbes, and
brains evolved together , honing our instinctive ability to locate, harvest, and
prepare food that is good for us and to avoid unhealthy food. And for almost
all of that time, we obtained our food by hunting and gathering. Could the
diet of the earliest hunter -gatherers guide us in the right direction?
At the same time, we have to remember that humans can thrive on a
tremendously diverse array of diets. From the handpicked tubers, berries,
and fruits of Tanzania’ s hunter -gatherers to the seals, whales, and narwhals
of the meat-lovi ng Inuit, traditional cultures thrived for generations on the
most diverse of fare. Agrarian farmers, in contrast, relied on wheat, corn,
rice, and other staple grains, as well as vegetables, with some meat, and
perhaps milk, cheese, and yogu rt from domesticated animals. Because of
our digestive versatility , peopl e have managed to find sustenance in a
tremendous variety of climate conditions and environments.
Part of the credi t for that feat goes to our own amazing GI tract and its
connection with the computing power of our nervous system. Millions of
years of evolution have perfected the gut to sense, recognize, and encode
everything we eat and drink into patterns of hormones and nerve impulses
sent to regulatory centers in the brain. But as we have learned, a large part
of the credit also goes to our gut microbiota, which take care of the variable
fraction of our food that cannot be absorbed in the small intestine. Taken
collectively , human gut microbiota are incredibly diverse and marvelously
adaptable, and over millions of years of evolution they have become an
indispensable link in our digestive process.
In North America today , it’s hard to get away from an unnatural diet,
one that’s full of sweeteners, emulsifiers, flavorings, and colorings, with
extra fat, added sugar , and vital gluten, and loaded with calories. Since the
food we eat influences the activity of our microbiota, what exactly would
our microbiota look like if we ate the diet our bodies evolved with? What
does our ancestral microbiome tell us? Can we ever even know what it was?
In fact, we can. And learning more about our true ancestral diet may
even provide some answers to the never -ending debate over which diet is
best for our bodies and minds: the high-fat/high-protein, low-c arb variety ,
the high-fruit and -vegetable omnivore diet, the extremes of the vegan diet,
or the tasty compromise of the Mediterranean diet. And in so doing, we can
get a glimpse to a time when our brains, guts, and gut microbes  were living
in harmony—a glimpse of the diet we have evolved to eat.
One way to do this is by studyi ng people who still follow a prehistoric
lifestyle, whose diet is not much different from the diet our bodies evolved
to eat over tens of thousands of years. I’m talking about the world’ s
remaining primitive agrarians or hunter -gatherers—rural Malawians and the
Yanomami.
Dietary Lessons from the Yanomami
Forty years ago, I had a fascinating personal experience that gave me a
firsthand look at the Yanomami and their eating habits. It involved a
journey that took me thousands  of miles into the Venezuelan jungle, to a
part of the Amaz on rain forest that is the homeland of a primal people living
around the headwaters of the Orinoco River .
My rain forest experience was brought back to me in unexpected
fashion in 2013, when I attended a major scientific conference on the gut
microbiome in Bethesda, Maryland. The conference was titled “Human
Microbiome Science: Vision for the Future.” One of the conference
presenters was ecologist and microbiologist Maria Gloria Dominguez-
Bello, an internationally renowned scientist who has authored landmark
papers on how the mode of delivery influences the gut microbiota of
newborn babies.  She was also part of a team of investigators that published
a comparison of the gut microbial composition among different groups,
including Amer indians (a group of indigenous people found in South
America) and people living in North American cities.
When I saw her first slides of the indigenous people living along the
Orinoco River , I couldn’ t believe my eyes: the images of these short,
beautiful people, with their distinctive features and unique monklike
hairstyles, imme diately brough t back memories from 1972, when I was
fortunate to be invited by a documentary filmmaker to serve as a camera
assistant in a film expedition to the Yanomami. I was in my first year of
college, and it didn’t take much for me to decide to take a seme ster off and
embark on this unique adventure.
Since I didn’ t know much about anthropology or medicine at the time—
not to mention the gut microbiota, which hadn’ t even been discovered in
their full magnitude—my main motivation for going on this expedition was
a mix of pure adventure-seeking and fascination at being part of a
documentary film production. However , preparing for the expedition, I also
learned about one unique aspect of the Yanomami’ s eating habits: the
complete lack of salt as a food additive. Several studies have linked low
sodium consumption by the Yanomami with a virtual absence of high blood
pressure and its medical complications. But now, after decades of clinical
practice and research into the complex dialogue between the brain, gut, and
microbiome, I realized that there were much more intriguing things about
the Yanomami diet, which not only influence their health but possibly also
their minds and behaviors.
I bring up this personal story because the Yanomami are one of a
handful of people in the world who have continued to follow the prehistoric
lifestyle that our ancestors lived  tens of thousands of years ago. Studying
their eating habits and their gut microbiomes gives us a window back in
time, to the period when humans and microbes first started their symbiotic
lives together . This research can give us clues about how our gut microbes
evolved, and the consequences this may have for our well-being today .
Along with the other two members of our film team, I lived in a
Yanomami village for two months. I had a chance to observe and
experience their daily lives, including how they collected, prepared, and
consumed their food. I saw and tasted what they ate on a daily basis and
also experienced their unique range of emotional behaviors, ranging from
the affectionate interactions of fathers with their newborns, to the violent,
ritualistic fistfights that took place during a major celebration, to their
preparations to go to war against another village.
Following an initial prolonged and noisy ritual of familiarization, during
which the entire village touche d our heads, faces, chests, and arms, and
after each of us was assigned a hammock, the village people pretty much
ignored the filmmakers living in their midst—except for the children, who
wanted to touch and play with everything we had in our backpacks,
including our cameras. This gave us a unique opportunity to watch and film
their daily routines and observe  their behaviors, particularly their activities
related to foraging and harvesting. Yanomamis have a strict division of
labor related to foraging: the men go hunting for birds, monkeys, deer, wild
pigs, and tapirs (all wild animals with minimal body fat), which  can take up
to 60 percent of their time. We would often see several men leaving the
shabono with bow and arrow in the early morning hours and returning later
in the day with their prey. The meat from these animals is roaste d or baked;
because they don’t use any oils or animal fats, nothing is fried. The women
would hang the prepared meat pieces on a pole within the family area,
including monkey heads and pieces of snake s, frogs, and birds, together
with bushels of platanos, a form of banana.
It was a commo n sight to see family members nibbling on these stored
food supplies throughout the day, and I was often invited to join in during
the snacks. Despite the abunda nce of wild animals in the forest, animal
products account for only a small percentage of the Yanomami’ s food
supply . Furthermore, our guide informed us that the Yanomamis never eat
their domestic animals, which are mainly kept as pets, or bird eggs, which
they only use for spiritual purposes and ceremonies. The women are
involved in horticulture, growing a form of sweet potato as well as platanos
and tobacco. We followed and filmed them on their long foraging trips into
the fores t to collect grubs, termites, frogs, honey , and seedlings. Both men
and women shared the activity of catching fish out of the pristine water of
the rivers. Procuring their food involves extensive physical exercise,
including prolon ged walking and running through the rain forest. Keeping
up with their pace in this hot and humid environment was not an easy task.
The Yanomami families depend  on the enormous diversity of the forest
for survival, and the high diversity of their environment is reflected in the
diversity of their gut microbiom es. In addition to their staple diet of fruit
and vegetables, they also employ a large number of plant products for other
purposes, including various plant-derived poisons that are used to make
deadly arrowheads for fishing and hunting, and hundreds of different plants,
berries, and seeds that are consumed for dietary , medicinal, and
hallucinogenic purposes. The Yanomamis also employ the principle of
fermentation in their food preparation, providing them with a natural supply
of microor ganisms. We witness ed how a group of people smashed a large
amount of platanos into a puree inside of a dugout canoe until natural
fermentation turned the slurry into an alcoholic beverage, which the men
then consumed in large quantities, with noticeable consequenc es for their
behavior . Perhaps the Yanomami, through centurie s of trial and error , had
learned somethi ng about how compounds from both food and medicinal
plants provide specific signals, triggering effects on both our brain and our
gut.
Overall, the Yanomamis’  diet was rich in plant foods, suppl emented
with occasional bits of meat. But unlike the processed and fat-enriched beef
and pork products that make up the bulk of our North American meat
supply , the meat the Yanomam is ate came from animals that were wild,
lean, and healthy . The Yanomami live a long way from the nutrition gurus
who fill today’ s bookshelves and airwaves, but their diet—rich in
vegetables, fruit, and occasional fish and lean meat, with no additives or
preservatives at all—is in line with Michael Pollan’ s well-known advice
from The Omnivor e’s Dilemma : “Eat food, not too much, mostly plants.”
I am in no way suggesting that you should become a hunter -gatherer; I
do not believe that we should all eat a Paleolithic diet for optimal health.
These indigenous people show stunted growth (which is adaptive for their
lives as hunter -gatherers in the forest), their life expectancy doesn’ t even
come close to ours, and they have a high rate of mortality from wars and
injuries. At the same time, observing their lifestyle does provide a unique
opportunity to learn about the intertwined roles of diet and the gut
microbiome in promoting good human health.
Is the North American Diet Bad for Your Gut
Microbes?
Can a lean diet, rich in a variety of plant foods with a small proportion of
meat, help supp ort the health of your gut microbiota? And has our modern
North American diet altered human gut microbiota for the worse? Only in
the last few years have scientists begun to uncover some answers.
A few years ago, Tanya Yatsunenko, Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello,
and a team of prominent microbiome experts under the leadersh ip of Jeffrey
Gordon from Washington University assessed the gut microbial
composition of the Guahibos, an indigenous Amazonian tribe living in the
same region as the Yanomamis; rural people from an agrarian village in the
southern African  nation of Malawi; and North American city dwellers. The
researchers used modern methods known as metagenomics: they isolated all
the gut microbes  from fecal samples, purified their genetic material (DNA),
then used an automated analysis technique to identify all the bacterial
genes. Using this technique, they found that gut microbiota from  the South
American Indian s and the rural Malawians were composed of a similar mix
of microbes, but a mix that’s very different from that of North  Americans.
At first glance, these findings wouldn’ t be too surprising, given the vastly
different lifestyl es and eating habits of us and these primal people living in
very dif ferent geographic and cultural settings.
The Malawians and Amerindia ns are genetically different and live in
very different tropical environments—the Amazonian rain forest, which
provides a fairly constant climate year-round, versus the arid savanna of
Malawi, which has marked wet and dry seasons—so what accounts for the
similarity? It turns out that in both of these traditional societies, people
consume a similar diet with a large variety of plant-based foods as well as
occasional lean meat from animals they’ve hunted themselves.
In fact, the Malawians and Amerindians had a similar pattern of
microbes in their gut that make up a telltale signature for humans adhering
to a diet high in plant and low in animal products, a reduced ratio of the
bacterial phyla of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, and, within the Bacteroidetes
group, an increased ratio of the groups Prevotella and Bacteroides. Other
studies comparing children from  rural areas of the West African country of
Burkina Faso to children  from Florence, Italy, or Hazda hunter -gatherers
from Tanzania’ s Eastern Rift Valley to adults from Bologna, Italy, have
confirmed these essential findings.
However , the differences between the three groups weren’ t limited to
the abundance of certain groups of microbes. Much more worrisome, their
findings showed  that people living on the typical North Americ an diet had
lost up to one-third of their microbial diversity compared to individuals
living a prehistoric lifestyle. And here’ s an equally concerning thought: this
dramatic change  in our gut-based ecosystem is directly comparable to the
estimated 30 percent loss of biodiversity that our planet has experienced
since 1970—much of which has occurred in the Amazonian rain forest, the
habitat of the Yanomami. Unfortunately , this decrease in biodiversity
around the world is not limited  to plants and animals living in subtropical
rain forests, and ecologists have developed elegant mathematical models to
characterize its effect on various ecosystems. Decreased biodiversity affects
the marine life living on the coral reefs, and the honeybees and monarch
butterflies in North America. Can we use the same insights ecologists have
gained from studying the decline of the ecosystems around us to understand
the consequence s of the declining biodiversity inside our guts? Just as
greater diversity in natural systems provides resilience against diseases,
greater diversity and richness in a host’ s microbial species and their
metabolites is associated with greater resilience in the face of infections,
antibiotics, variable nutrient supply, carcinogenic chemicals, and chronic
stress.
Not everyone in North Americ a follows the typical regional diet, of
course. Similar to societies that subsist on agrarian and prehi storic diets,
vegetarians have  lower intakes of saturated fat and cholesterol and higher
intakes of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, nuts, soy products, fiber, and
phytochemicals (chemical substances that occur naturally in plants). There
is substantial scientific evidence showing significant health benefits from
eating diets of this type that are high in plant food and low in animal-
derived components, especially fat. For example, many studies have
demonstrated that people who eat vegetarian or vegan diets have a reduced
prevalence of obesity , metabo lic syndrome, coronary vascu lar disease,
hypertension, and stroke, as well as a reduced risk of cancer . Unfortunately ,
there’ s very little evidence to date indicating that such diets also have direct
benefits for brain health—which is to say, benefits that aren’ t simply a
reflection of better physical health.
As impressive as the differences in gut microbial abundance and
diversity were in the adult subjects in the Yatsunenko study , investigators
found that differences in gut microbiomes between the South American
Indian and African groups and the North American city dwelle rs were not
necessarily dependent on the lifestyle of the adult subjects, but they were
already apparent during the first three years of life and persisted into
adulthood. What might be responsible for these gut microbial differences so
early in life, before infants have been exposed to the different diets of the
adults?
Where It All Begins
Food plays a key part in the health of our gut, our brain, and in the
interaction of the two vital organs, and this close relationship starts the
moment we are born. While we all want to optimize our health as adults, the
findings of the Yatsunenko study remind us that we must not forget that
some of the most consequential influences of food on the gut microbiome
start long before we can make our own decisions about what we eat and
which probiotics we choose. These early food-related influences on our gut
microbiome set the foundation  for our adult gut microbial diversity and
resilience against disease, and errors in this process in this early
programming can increase our risk for a range of health problems, ranging
from obesity to IBS. In addition to the initial shaping of a baby’ s gut
microbiome during birth, the food the child receives from her mother plays
a crucial  role in this process. A study by microbiologist Ruth Ley of Cornell
University and her team highlighted this important influence of early diet
on the gut microbiota of a healthy baby boy, analyzed at sixty  time points
from birth to age two and a half.
The boy was breastfed exclusively for his first four and a half months.
At first, Ley and her colleagues found, the infant’ s microbiome was rich in
species that facilitate the digestion of milk carbohydrates, primarily
bifidobacteria and some lactobacilli. This was not surprising. But before he
had consumed any formula or a bite of solid food, gut microbes such as
Prevotella appeared that could metabolize complex carbohydrates from
plants. This meant that the baby’s gut microbiota were prepared for solid
food before the baby had ever eaten any .
The baby’ s mother continued to breastfeed him until he was nine
months old, and the parents gradually phased in baby foods like rice cereal
and peas, then table foods. Once the baby was switched to solid food, the
microbiota switched again to microbes that ferment plant carbohydrates.
In the early months of the baby’ s life, relatively few species lived in the
gut, and events such as a fever , introduction of peas to his diet, or antibiotic
treatment for an ear infection caused the child’ s microbial communities to
fluctuate dramatically . But the diversity climbed by the month, and by the
time the boy was two and a half years old, his gut micro biome had
stabilized and come to resemble that of an adult.
From this and other studies, it’s now clear that those first two and a half
to three years shape our gut microbiome for a lifetime. It’s as if a child’ s
body were staffing a symphony orchestra, with each species of gut bacteria
playing a single instrument. At first players try out. Some are hired and
some are not, but many seats remain empty . By age two and a half,
however , the orchestra is fully  staffed, and the majority of players have
their jobs for life. Depending on the circumstances, and the food supply ,
this orchestra is able to play a repertoire of dif ferent tunes.
The Crucial Role of Diet in Shaping a Baby’s Gut-
Brain Dialogue
In recen t years, as we’ve learned more about the connections between brain,
gut, and microbiome, I’ve thought back occasionally to the Yanomami
teenager who had given birth to a baby in the Venezuelan jungle, and whom
I watched interacting with the newborn for several weeks. I regularly saw
the youn g moth er joining the other women in the village to collect food
items, while carrying her baby with help of a shoulder strap over her chest
and belly , breastfeeding her throughout the day .
The baby seemed perfectly healthy , and based on what I witnessed and
what investigators have since learned, the baby’ s gut—a nd its gut
microbiota—were off to a healthy start, showing high abundance and
diversity of microor ganisms. From birth onward, this girl was exposed not
only to the vast microbial diversity of her natural environment , but also to
the unique components of the food she received from her mother .
We know today that it’s the infant’ s food supply , in particular breast
milk, which helps her gut fill with the initial healthy mix of microbes. Keep
in mind  that the composition of breast milk is crucially dependent on the
diet the mother consumes. Rece nt studies have shown that the composition
of the nursing mother ’s diet has a major influence on the baby’s risk for
metabolic diseas e and obesity later on in life, and much of this is mediated
by the early programming of the baby’ s gut microbiota. While mothers have
always known that breast milk is the optimal food for their infants, recent
gut microbiome science has revealed unexpected mechanisms by which this
health benefit is mediated. Besides all the nutrients essential for the child’ s
development, breast milk contains prebiotics—compounds with the ability
to feed particular groups of gut microbes. Specifically it contains
oligosaccharides—complex carbohydrates made of three to ten linked sugar
molecules—that are essential in shaping the baby’ s gut microbiota by
selectively promoting the growth of beneficial bacte ria. These
carbohydrates, called human milk oligosaccharides, or HMOs, form the
third-lar gest component of human breast milk, and more than 150 distinct
HMO molecules have been identified.
What’ s fascinating about HMOs is that women’ s bodies make them
despite the fact that they are indigestible by the human gut. These
molecules resist  the acidity in an infant’ s stomach as well as digestion by
pancreatic and small intestinal  enzymes, reaching the end of the small
intestine and colon (where the great majority of our gut microbes live) in an
intact form. Once they reach their target, they nourish beneficial microbiota,
in partic ular Bifidobacterium  species  that are able to partially break them
down into short-chain fatty acids and other metabolites. These breakdown
products create an environment favoring the growth of good microbes over
potential pathogens. This helps explain the fact that infants who are not
breastfed have fewer bifidobacteria in their stool than formula-fed infants.
As David Mills of the University of California, Davis, who is one of the
world’ s experts on the components of human milk, points out, HMOs are
the only food that has evolved strictly for the purpose of feeding the infant’ s
microbiota. Clearly , evolution has designed these molecules specifically to
help program the baby’ s gut microbiota, while at the same time providing
protection against pathogenic bacteria. One way they accomplish this is by
favoring the dominance of Bifidobacterium infantis  (microbes that are
experts in digesting them), thereby preventing the growth of potentially
harmful bacteria as they compete for a limited nutrient supply . In addition,
HMOs have direct antimicrobia l effects against such pathogens, which is
reflected in a reduction of microbial infections affecting the infant. Thus
HMOs are essential to the devel opment of a healthy infant micro biome, and
for the temporary protection against intestinal infections, at a time when the
infant’ s microbiome has a low diversity (made up of a limited number of
microbial groups and species) and is not ready yet to defend effectively
against infections.
Evolution has come up with a beautiful seamless transition of the nearly
microbe-free fetus into a world teeming with microor ganisms, by first using
the unique microbial environme nt of the mother ’s vagina to inoculate the
sterile gut of the newborn, then promoting the growth of these same
microbes in the gut of the infant with specific molecules contained in
human breast milk long enough for the growing infant to develop its own
unique microbial composition.
During my two months with the Yanomami, I saw mothers breastfeeding
not just infants, but also toddlers . In fact, they breastfeed for three full years
while adding platanos to this early diet after the first year, as do many other
traditional hunter -gatherer societies. During that period, a child’ s gut
microbiome is not the only thing that is taking shape—her brain is as well.
Brain development continues through adolescence, but the first few years of
life are especially critical. Can breastfeeding change the gut-microbiota-
brain conversation to promote healthy development of critical brain circuits
and systems?
Long-term studies of breastfed infants suggest that it can. Several
longitudinal studies have followed such infants until they grew up, with the
scientists measuring their cogni tive and intellectual abilities along the way.
Such studies, in which researchers obtain measurements on subjects
periodically over the years, offer a movie showing how a particular process
develops; most important, they can reveal cause and effect. The longitudinal
studies on breastfed infants have shown that the longer an infant is
breastfed, the larger his brain is, a trait associated with improved cognitive
development.
Breastfeeding can even enhance a baby’ s emotional and social
development. In recent work from a team of investigators at the Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Leipzig, Germany ,
investigators tested eight-month-old infants who had been exclusively
breastfed earlier in their lives, for their ability to recognize emotion from a
person’ s body language, depicted by images of a person who was happy or
showed expressions of fear. The results were dramatic: the infan ts who were
breastfed longer  responded more to happy body expressions than those who
had been breastfed for a shorte r period. Recognizing basic emotions like
happiness or anger from facial expressions and body language gives babies
a fundamental tool that’ s crucial to their emotional and social development.
How does breastfeeding specifically alter the brain regions responsible
for learn ing these skills? The results of the German study suggest that it
does so in part through the action of oxytocin. A variety of sensory stimuli
cause oxytocin release in the brain: gentle touch, nursing a child, or certain
gut sensations caused by nutrien ts. The hormone is released in the brains of
both the nursing mother (where it stimulates the flow of milk) and her
infant. Oxytocin promotes affiliation and bonding, suggesting that oxytocin
release during nursing enhances mother -child bonding. In a follow-up
study , it was reported that this positive effect of prolonged breastfeeding
was dependent on the genetic makeup of the infants, as it was only seen in
infants who had a particular genetic variation in the signaling system for
oxytocin.
While fascinating by themselves, the studies on the relationship
between breastfeeding and emotional reactivity didn’ t address the question
of which aspect of the breastfeeding was responsible for the oxytocin
release in the brain. “Breast feeding is much more than simply a meal at the
breast,” writes the lead author , Tobias Grossmann, and his colleagues. So
was it the positiv e experiences of the infant associated with prolonged body
contact that came with the breastfeeding, the oral stimulation (which
stimulates oxyto cin release in the mother), or the consumption of milk
sugar (which can stimulate the release of opioid-like molecules in the
brain)? Or was it some metabolite, such as the Valium-like amino acid
GABA, which the infant’ s gut microbiota produced in response to the
regular delivery of human milk oligosaccharides to the intestine , and which
signaled the brain that all is good?
In the brain-imaging study our UCLA  group did on adult female
volunteers who ate probiotic-en riched yogurt regularly , probiot ics affected
the activity of some of the same emotional brain regions that were affected
in the breastfed babies in Grossmann’ s study described above. And in very
recent studies, we found that there is a correlation between the volume of
certain brain regions and the general composition of the gut microbiota. Is it
possible that this relationship between the brain and the gut microbes
develops early in life, during the time when both brain architecture and gut
microbial comp osition are still under development? Based on what we
know today , the amount and duration of delivery of human milk
oligosaccharides to the infant’ s metabolic machinery in the gut could play a
crucial role in this process.
Can a New Diet Alter Your Gut Microbiota?
When your diet changes, it can fundamentally alter living conditions for
your gut microbes. But there are trillions of them in your gut, and many can
reproduce quickly . This means that—in theory at least—natural selection
could act quickl y, allowing the best-adapted bugs to thrive and others to lie
low or die of f entirely .
But that’s not the only possibility . Existing gut microbes could also
adapt to the new conditions by altering their gene expression to activate
newly essential functions and turn off others that they no longer need. To
find out which of these two possibilities is correct, and how a major dietary
shift would alter the mix of microbes in the gut, several research groups
investigated whether difference s in dietary habits among peop le living in
industrialized societies are reflected in changes in their gut microbiota and
the metabolites they produce. Peter Turnbaugh’ s group at Harvard
University studied the acute effect of switching healthy individuals from
their normal diet to either a plant-based diet (rich in grains, legumes, fruits,
and vegetables)  or an extreme  animal-based, high-fat diet (composed of
meats, eggs, and cheeses).
The short-term switching of individuals from their regular diet to either
a plant- or an animal-based diet also changed their gut microbial
composition. The changes were similar to earlier reports about microbiome
differences between herbivore and carnivore animals, and about gut
microbial differences between Westerners and people eating a prehistoric
diet. Interesting ly, the animal-based high-fat diet had a greater effect on
people’ s baseline microbiota composition and prevalence of certain species
than the plant-based diet did, suggesting that it represented a greater
deviation from the subjects’  default diet than the plant-based diet did. Those
on the animal-based diet also showed increased abundance of
microor ganisms tolerant to bile acids (bile acids are required to absorb fat in
the small intestine) and had decreased levels of bacteria that metabolize
complex sugar molecules contained in plants. When subjects who had been
living on a vegetarian diet before the study  were switched to the animal-
based diet, microor ganisms that are highly prevalent in prehistoric and
agrarian societies were reduced,  confirming the importance of this genus for
metabolizing plant carbohydrates.
In addition to these changes in microbial organization, microbial
metabolic activity showed diet-related changes as well. As expected,
compared to the plant-based diet and the baseline diet, the animal-based
diet resulted in a significantly higher concentration of products from amino
acid fermentation, and lower levels of metabolites resulting from
carbohydrate fermentation (in particular , short-chain fatty acids).
As the study’ s authors pointed out, the ability of the gut microbiota to
rapidly shift its composition and functional profiles may have been
important to mankind’ s survival, since it allows adjustment to variations in
climate- and season-related availability of animal and plant foods. In
addition, it probably had an adaptive value during the evolution of humans
from our earliest evolutionary ancestors to today’ s Homo sapiens . The
ability to quickly adapt to readily available plant foods during times of
limited availabi lity of meat may have provided an alternative source of
calories and nutrients. The findings also may explain why humans can
adjust to rapidly changing therapeutic and fad diets (for example, gluten-
free, Atkins, paleo, and vegan diets) without major side effects and
apparently without dramatic changes in mood, affect, or stress
responsiveness.
Given this evidence that our gut microbiota can rapidly adapt to extreme
short-term dietary changes, in terms of both their composition and the
metabolites they produce, we might expect to see clear differences between
individuals in a Western urban environment who have chosen to consume
plant-based diets (vegan and vegetarian) compared to their omnivore
neighbors. Surprisingly , a study by Gary Wu and his group at the University
of Penn sylvania did not confirm this speculation. The investigators did a
detailed analysis of the gut microbiota and gut-microbe-derived metabolites
in a group of omnivores and in individuals who had been on a vegan diet
for at least six months. Contrary to earlier study results regarding
individuals who were born in and have lived in different geographic regions
of the world for all their lives, they found only a modest difference in the
gut microbiota of Westerners who had chosen their diets to be either
omnivores or vegan. They did observe differences in the gut microbe
metabolites of the two groups as measured in their blood and urine,
however , largely reflecting the vegans’  lower intake of protein and fat and
higher intake of carbohydrates. As expected, these differences in metabolite
profiles could be explained by the increased metabolism of plant-derived
complex sugar molecules by the vegan group’ s gut microbiota, and the
increased amount of animal-rela ted amino acids and lipids consumed by the
omnivores.
In short , diet changed the study subjects’  production of microbial
metabolites without significantly changing the compositi on of the
microor ganisms that produced these metabolites. The investigators
speculated that if diet is the reason for the significant differences in gut
microbiota previously observed in distinct human populations in different
parts of the world, then such diet-related differences may take several
generations to evolve or may require very early life exposure s to have a
lasting ef fect on the gut microbiota.
We now know that there are multiple mechanisms by which the gut
microbiota can be influenced early in life, including the moth er’s diet in
pregnancy and during nursing, exposure to environmental microbes, and
stress-induced brain-gut signals that affect both the mother and the infant’ s
gut microbiomes. The geograp hic differences in microbiota composition
may also be due in part to the major differences in the environmental
conditions of individuals living in harmony with their environment in
isolated parts of the world, compared to those of American city dwellers
living in metropolitan areas, removed from direct exposure  to natural
environments and getting their food from the supermarket or restaurants.
Despite the adaptability of our microbiota, it’s also true that the
microbiota of rural agrarians and hunter -gatherers have capabilities that we
have simply lost. Even if we decided to start eating the same diet as a
hunter -gatherer or traditional rural agrarian, we’d never be able to ferment
plant food as well or produce as many useful metabolites in our gut as they
do. This so-called permissive microbiota produces an abundant supply of
short-chain fatty acids—ener gy-rich beneficial molecules that may protect
against colon cancer and inflammatory bowel disease and are likely to play
a role in gut-to-brain communication.
People living in industrialized societies, in contrast, have a “restrictive”
gut microbiota composition that is not as efficient in fermenting complex
plant-based carbohydrates to short-chain fatty acids, even if you consume a
lot of fruits, vegetables, and other plant-derived foods. How would such a
restrictive composition develop?
Wu thinks that this may be due to the absence of certain microbial
species, such as the bacterium Ruminococcus bromii, whose activities are
essential for initiating the degradation of these hard-to- break-down
substrates. Within the ecosystem  of the gut microbiome, many of the same
metabolites can be produced by different members of the microbial
community and are consumed or transformed by others. On the other hand,
other species of gut microbes have more specialized skills, and appear to
play a key role in degrading starch particles that escape digestion in the
small intestine. This so-called resistant starch is contained in a wide variety
of plant-based foods, including bananas, potatoes, seeds, legumes, and
unprocessed whole grains. In most individuals, resistant starch is
completely ferm ented to short-chain fatty acids in the colon, but some
people’ s gut microbiota lack that ability .
It turns  out that Ruminococcus bromii will typically  initiate the
breakdown of resistant starch, making the partially digested substrate
available to other bacteria, which then break down the individual sugars
further using different enzymes. Microor ganisms like Ruminococcus bromii
are known in ecological parlanc e as a “keystone species,” as they carry out
activities that are essential for the ecosystem as a whole to function
optimally . Wolves, for example, are keystone species in Yellowstone
National Park, where they contro l the population of elk, which keeps the elk
from overgrazing and thereb y keeps the ecosystem in balance. A
disappearance of wolves has widespread consequences on a large number of
downstream species and ultimately will affect the function of the entire
ecosystem. In the gut microbiome, all of the other microbes are
compromised in their ability to do their job (such as metabolizing complex
carbohydrates) if a keystone species like Ruminococcus bromii is reduced
or absent. In contrast, if any of the downstream species should be absent,
their work can readily be taken over by other downstream actors.
All this means that when you are born into Western civilizati on, you
acquire a Western microbiome as well. Even if you go vegan today , your
gut microbiota will remain that of a typical omnivore, and even if you eat a
paleo diet for the rest of your life, your gut microbiota won’ t turn into that
of a hunter -gatherer . However , the pattern of microbial metabolites you
produce depends on which diet you consume.
That said, even if you and a neighbor eat a very similar diet, you will
have different species of microbes in your gut than she does. We only share
a small amount of the microbial species and strains with our fellow humans,
even though we look pretty similar in terms of the genes these microbes
express and the metabolites that they produce. As Rob Knight, at the
University of California, San Diego, whose analytical genius has made
modern gut micro biome research possible, puts it, the gut microbiome is
like a large-scale ecosystem in which different groupings of microbial
species can carry out the same functions. While two grasslands  might look
similar in a picture, especially when compared to two forests, the two
grasslands may well differ in the hundreds of plant and animal species that
live in them and that create these similar -appearing environments.
If you are a music lover , you may visualize the relationship between the
composition of your gut microb iota and their functions in a different way.
You probably have your favorit e orchestra, like the Los Angel es or Berlin
philharmonic, which you have listened to many times. Most of the
musicians in these orchestras have been the same every time you have
listened to one of their concerts, yet the music they play, be it a symphony
by Beeth oven, Mahler , or Mozart, is completely different depending on the
notes the musicians are given. So when it comes to your health, the identity
of the microbial species matters less than the job that they do, just as the
identity of the individual musici ans is less important to your enjoyment than
the piece of music they play .
How Diet Changes the Gut-Brain Conversation
As Wu’s study illustrates, our gut microbiota can adapt to dramatic changes
in our food sources by changing the food they live on, and the metabolites
they produce. This is one element of the enormous evolutionary wisdom
contained in the gut. We’ve discussed how this wisdom has been
programmed into our gut-microbiome-brain axis, and how it has provided
us with not only a perfectly functioning digestive system, but also a
growing library of gut feelings that help us predict the future, and instincts
that help tune our awareness to the dangers in our world. Importantly , while
our gut microbio me along with its connection with the brain is programmed
early in life, it also remains flexible and adaptable throughout life.
Throughout this book I’ve described our brain-gut-microbiome axis as
analogous to a supercomputer—one that can perfectly adjust to the ongoing
changes in our internal and external world, and that has intricate
connections to our immune system, our metabolism, our nervous system,
and every other system in our body . The adaptability of the gut-brain-
microbiome axis is clearly demonstrated by the fact that human s were able
(until recently) to transition successfully from the prehistoric lifestyle,
which was closely connected with the natural environment, to a lifestyle in
which we live in megacities and eat food items that often come from distant
regions across the world. Our gut microbiome can even learn to metabolize
substances it has never encountered before, including many of the modern
drugs, pesticides, and chemicals that we ingest.
Because of this versatility , there ’s good reason to assume that your gut
metabolites will differ dependi ng on what type of diet you eat. That’ s
because the breakdown of complex plant-derived carbohydrates, such as
resistant starch, generates a fundamentally different set of metabolites than
the breakdown of amino acids and fats—major components of meat and
milk, eggs, and cheese. For example, in contrast to the rather limited range
of carbohydrate metabolites—which consist primarily of just a few short-
chain fatty acids —your body digests proteins into twenty different building-
block molecules, called amino acids, and microbes in the colon ferment
these amino acids into a much wider range of metabolites,  which can
interact with the nervous system.
Most undigested plant-derived carbohydrates are metabolized by
microbes in the colon into short-chain fatty acids such as butyrate—so
named because it has a buttery odor—and acetate, as well as gases such as
carbon dioxide, methane, and hydrogen sulfide (which gives stool a bad
odor). Butyrate is an excellent example of the many health promoting
effects of plant- based diets on the health of the gut-brain axis. It not only
plays a crucial role in providing food for the cells lining the colon, but also
has many health-promoting effects on the enteric nervous system. And this
short-chain fatty acid represents a key player in the communicat ion between
the gut and the brain and in protecting the brain against the dangerous low-
grade inflammatory ef fects caused by a high-fat diet or artificial sweeteners.
Illustrating the tremendous potential that changes in diet can have on
your brain, it has been estimated that the human gut microbiome has the
potential to produce some 500,000 distinct metabolites, known collectively
as the metabolo me, and many of these metabolites are neuroactive, which
means they can influence your nervous system. Some individual
microor ganisms produce up to fifty different metabolites, including
hormones, neurotransmitters, and other molecules that communicate
directly with the nervous system . There can also be up to 40,00 0 variations
of any given metabolite, depending on how it’s combined with other
metabolites. These metabolites are produced by some 7 million genes, far
more than the 20,000 in the human genome.
Since we eat such a diversity of foods, particularly plant foods, and our
guts contain such vast numbers of diverse microbial cells, it has been
estimated that 40 percent of the metabolites circulating in our bodies are
produced not by our own cells and tissues, but instead by our gut microbes.
Indeed, it’s becoming clear that your gut microbiome plays a key role in a
remarkably complex signaling system that can influence every cell in your
body , including those in the brain. Although it will take years of research to
untangle all the complex effects that these microbial metabolites have on us
—either by themselves or more  likely in combination with others—there is
no question in my mind that these effects are profound and will
revolutionize the way we unders tand the role of diet in the devel opment and
in the treatment  of disorders of the brain and the brain-gut axis. In other
words, the orche stra of microbes in your gut is fully staffed with seasoned
musicians, and ready to perform from the first years of life. The diet you
choose determines not only the tunes it plays, but also the quality of these
tunes. And you, ultimately , are the conductor of the symphony .
CHAPTER
9
THE ONSLAUGHT OF THE NORTH AMERICAN
DIET: WHAT EVOLUTION DID NOT FORESEE
It was one of those days. You overslept, rushed out of the house without
breakfast, got stuck in rush hour traffic, and arrived at work thirty minutes
late, missing the beginning of an important meeting. In order to make up for
your late arrival, you stayed at your desk for an extra hour and weren’ t able
to pick up your daughter from soccer practice, earning you the resentment
of both your wife and daughter . When your frantic day finally came to a
close, you left the office at six, stopping at a gas station on the way home to
fill up your near-empty tank. While you were there you grabbed a bag of
chips and a cand y bar and devou red them in the car. By the time you pulled
into your driveway , your mood had lifted a little.
Many of us can relate to a scenario like this—on a day when we’re
feeling particularly stressed or anxious, we reach for foods—donuts, bagels,
muffins, candy—that make us feel a little better . Our emotion al states are
closely related to our fat and sugar intake, and many of us aren’ t paying
enough attention  to what we’re  eating. In fact, more than 35 percent of
calories in the American diet comes from fat, most of it from animal
sources. Even though the stand ard diet in several northern European and
even Mediterran ean countries (like Greece) have a similar total fat intake,
the North American diet stands out in terms of animal fat consumption, with
a significantly higher percentage of animal fat compar ed to the
Mediterranean diet. It’s well known that this excessive animal fat intake,
together with excessive sugar  intake, is a contributing factor to the
American obesity epidemic. But it’s perhaps less well known  that a diet
high in animal fat can also contribute to overconsumption of food and even
food addiction— and our gut microbes may play an important role in this
connection. On the other hand, recent epidemiological evidence suggest that
diets low in animal fat, such as the Mediterranean diet, don’t just have
positive consequ ences for your waistline, metabolism, and cardiovascular
health. Such diets are also associated with a lower risk for certain cancers
and serious brain diseases such as depression, Alzheimer ’s, and Parkinson’ s
disease.
Studies in animals and human s have demonstrated that a key link
between the overconsumption of animal fats and the onset of disease—
including diseases of the brain—is a chronic state of low-grade
inflammation. Inflammation that starts in the gut can spread throughout the
body , reaching crucial brain regions (including those that control our
appetite). Our gut microbes play a key role in this process. In this way, our
modern North American diet— high in animal fat, low in plants, and
enriched with chemicals and preservatives—is reprogrammin g our gut-
brain-microbiome axis, and not for the better . Taken together with the
disturbing chang es in our agric ultural and food processing meth ods, this
shift in our diet has led to what can only be called a watershed moment in
human physiology—an extremely dangerous one.
Our Brave New Diet
We’ve discussed how, througho ut our evolution, humans have been able to
switch easily between diets high in animal protein and those rich in plants,
depending on which foods were available. For that we can thank our gut
microbes, their vast number of genes, and their sophisticated ability to
detect substances in our food and transform them into beneficial
metabolites, thereby adjusting our own metabolism and food intake to
accommodate our changing diet. But as we have seen in the eating habits of
the Yanomami or the Hazda, our ancestors evolved in an environment of not
only a limited and hard-to-obtain food supply , but also the near absence of
foods high in fat and refined  sugars. In other words, evolution never
anticipated the standard American diet of today . And our gut-microbiome
brain axis is ill prepared to come with the consequences of that diet.
If you think of your digestive system as a turbine engine that can burn
any type of combustible material to generate energy, it automatically
follows that you should be able to digest and metabolize whatever you
want. In fact, this “engine” metaphor is of critical importance to the food
industry . Millions of consumers are willing to buy anything labeled as
“food,” as long as it can be packaged into a shape, taste, and smell that
appeals. But if we think of our brain-gut-microbiome axis as an
information-processing supercomputer that constantly tries to adjust our
behavior and our bodies to ongoing changes in our internal and external
world, then we can understand what’ s happening today .
In recen t decades, changes fueled by the profit-driven activi ties of
corporations involved in the production, processing, and marketing of
inexpensive, highly addictive foods have completely altered our diet. This
in turn has direc tly affected the interactions between our brain s, our guts,
and the microbiome. Strangely , this has not only happened to our own
bodies but has also occurred in our livestock (and in our pets) as well.
We know that our gut microbiome has no problem rapidly switching
between animal-  or plant-based diets. In fact, the omnivore diet (which was
practiced by our prehistoric ancestors for hundreds of thousands of years)
may actually be our default diet, with the vegetarian diet being a fallback
solution for times when the availability of animal products was limited. But
today’ s animal products are fundamentally different from what our
ancestors ate, and what their few remaining direct descendan ts, living in
isolated prehisto ric societies, continue to eat. The meat that these primal
people eat is drawn from many different animal species—including wild
animals and birds, fish, and insects—and it’s lean, with dramatically lower
fat content than today’ s comm ercial meat products. These animals roam
free and unrestrained in natural  environments, feeding on a vast variety of
plants and other creatures. They have an intact, highly diverse gut
microbiome, making them healthy and resistant to diseases.
It’s clear that the increased availability of animal protein has had
significant bene fits. It has played a major role in enabling our brains to
grow larger over the course of human evolution, and it has helped increase
our average height over the past century .
But in contrast to our ancestors’  protein supply , our livestock often live
out their lives in small pens, eating feed (like corn) that their digestive
systems are not built to handle , and which is designed to fatten them as
efficiently as possible. They ingest antibiotics and other chemicals, which
reduce the diversity of their gut microbes and make them more vulnerable
to seriou s gut infections. For all these reasons, the meat, eggs, and milk that
come from these animals—and deriv atives of these products (often no
longer recognizable as food) in today’ s processed food—are dramatically
different from only fifty years ago, and they have fundamentally  altered our
diet.
Unfortunately , evolution hasn’ t had enough time to program our
defenses against  these changes, and as a result, our brave new food supply
has caught our bodies unprepared. It is only recently that people have
become aware of these dangers and begun to take action.
How a Diet High in Animal Fat Can Harm Your
Brain
Why does our modern diet, supplied in large part by today’ s food industry ,
damage our bodies and brains?
For years, scientists have linked chronic disease to overweight and
obesity . As the theory went, fat cells in our body , particularly fat stores in
our belly  (so called visceral fat), were the primary source of inflammatory
molecules, called cytokines or adipokines, that circulate in the blood,
reaching the heart, the liver, and the brain. These inflammatory molecules
were thought to be the chief cause of low-grade inflammation, also known
as “metabolic endotoxemia,” which in turn raised the risk of cardiovascular
disease and cancer . Brain diseases such as depression, Alzheimer ’s, and
Parkinson’ s were rarely brought into context with these peripheral
metabolic processes.
According to this theory , as long as your weight was in the normal
range and your waistline hadn’ t increased, you could continue indulging in
your bacon for breakfast, your hambur gers and hot dogs and fat-laden
tortilla chips, without any ill ef fects.
But it is now clear that even a single high-fat meal can switch your gut’s
immune system  into the low-g rade inflammation mode and that regular
consumption of a diet high in animal fat can trigger persisten t low-grade
inflammation long before a person becomes obese. A single time of
switching on your gut’s immune  system, such as when you gobble down a
delicious piece of cheesecake or a chocolate sundae after dinner , is unlikely
to cause  any ill effects on your brain. However , when you regularly
consume foods packed with animal fats, it is a more serious story .
Today , there’s far more animal fat hidden in all the things we love to eat,
and while we are craving and enjoying the consumption of these tasty
meals, they secretly manipulate  our gut microbiota, their metabolites, and
our eating behavior . In order to understand how this manipulation occurs,
we have to briefly recall how the gut-brain axis normally regulates our food
intake.
The language that signals your brain to stop eating when you’ve eaten
enough and feel hungry again when your stomach is empty includes
hormones that can stimulate or turn off your appetite, the latter being called
satiety hormone s. These gut hormones target a brain region called the
hypothalamus, which is the master regulator of our eating beha vior. When
the syste m is working properly , the hypothalamus can precisely compute
how many calories your body needs on any given day, based on your level
of physi cal activity , the temperature, and other factors that influence your
metabolism. The hypothalamus is one of the most widely conne cted regions
in the brain, reflecting its ability to collect vast amounts of vital information
and to influence other region s of the brain. A large portion of this
information comes from the gut, sent in the form of various gut hormones
and vagal nerve signals.
When you’re hungry , enteroendocrine cells interspersed within the cells
lining your stomach release a hormone, called ghrelin, also known as the
hunger hormone, which either travels through the bloodstream to the brain
or stimulates the tips of the vagus nerve in the gut to signa l the brain
directly . On the other hand, when you’ve had enough to eat, a different
group of appetite-suppressing hormones (including cholecystokinin and
glucagon-like peptide) are released from enteroendocrine cells in your small
intestine, and these hormones turn the system of f and suppress appetite.
For most of mankind’ s existence, this system has worked remarkably
well, keeping our weights surprisingly stable over the long term, despite
dramatic fluctuations in food intake and physical activity . It has kept us
alive through prolonged drough ts and famines, and through the transition
from prehistoric diets through the meals common in the antiqu ities all the
way to modern diets of today . For many in the United States, however , it no
longer does, and these changes in appetite regulation that have occurred in
the last fifty years play a major role in our current obesity epidemic
What exactly happened to cause your appetite-control system to stop
working properly?
Over the past few years, investigators have been looking hard for
answers. We know now from animal experiments that a regular high-fat diet
can numb the satiety response both at the gut and the brain level, reducing
your ability to tell when you’ve eaten enough. There is solid evidence that it
does this in both locations by causing low-grade inflammation. In the gut,
that inflammation reduces sensitivity to satiety signals by sensors on the
vagus nerve, which normally tell your hypothalamus that you’re full. In
your hypothalamus, it reduces sensitivity to satiety signals arriving from the
gut.
But how does diet cause inflammation in the first place? As new science
is now revealing, your gut microbiota play a pivotal role.
How Your Gut Microbes Help Regulate Appetite
When you ingest a high-fat meal, blood levels of inflammatory molecules
increase throughout your body . These include cytokines and a substance
called lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is part of the cell wall of certain gut
microbiota known as gram-negative bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria
include many pathogens, such as E. coli and salmonella, but also many of
the dominant groups of microbi ota living in our gut, including the phyla of
Firmicutes and Proteobacteria, whose populations rise when we eat a diet
heavy in animal  fat. When a gut microbe approaches the cells that line the
inner gut, these  cells recognize LPS on the microbe’ s surface  and use a
receptor to bind it. LPS stimulates these cells to produce other
inflammatory molecules (cytokines), makes the gut leakier , and activates
the immune cells in the gut.
Under normal conditions, as discussed in Chapter 6, several barriers
prevent LPS and other microbial inflammatory signals from initiating this
sequence of events. As LPS levels increase (as they do in response to a
high-animal-fat diet), the molecule starts to breach these barriers and
activate the gut’s immune system to produce cytokines and reach distant
sites within our bodies, includin g our brain. Once these molecul es reach the
brain, they get access to its immune system, the glial cells, which start
producing inflam matory molecules themselves, targeting nearby  nerve cells
in the brain. In the hypothalamus, such inflammatory change s make this
appetite-regulating center less responsive to the satiety signals from the gut
and the body .
Several other lines of evidence further support the notion that gut microbes
play a central role when a high-fat diet causes systemic inflammation. A
few years ago, microbiome expert Andrew Gewirtz, at Geor gia State
University , genetically removed a different class of toll-like receptors
involved in the innate immune response. Animals lacking the receptors
become obese and develop all the features of metabolic syndrome, a
constellation of resistance to the hormone insulin, increased blood sugar
levels, and increased triglyceri des. The weight gain of the animals was
related to their voracious appetite, suggesting a defect in their satiety
mechanisms.
Then the researchers found something particularly intriguing. These
obese, genetical ly modified mice had a different mix of gut microbes than
normal mice, and when Gewirtz’ s team transplanted their stool into lean
germ-free mice, the lean animals developed the same metabolic features as
the dono r mice. Most important, they also developed the same uninhibited
food intake and became obese. It’s plausible that the chan ges in the
animals’  gut microbiota and their altered interactions with their gut-based
innate immune system led to a state of metabolic toxemia, the low-grade
systemic inflam mation discussed earlier . Once these inflammatory signals
reach the hypothalamus, the appetite-controlling mechanism is thrown off
balance.
A high-fat diet is not only able to change the inner workings of the
hypothalamus to change your appetite, but also is likely to compromise
appetite regulation by altering some of the key appetite-related sensors in
the gut wall itself. Neuroscientis t Helen Raybould’ s group at the University
of Calif ornia, Davis, asked the question if changes in a high-fat diet can
change the relative sensitivity of vagal sensory nerve endings in the gut to
appetite-stimulating and appetite-suppressing gut signals, and if these
changes are associated with a compromised inhibition of food intake. They
had previously shown that the satiety hormone cholecystokinin, released by
cells in the gut in the presence of fat, was able to switch these nerve endings
from a “hunger mode” to a “satiety mode.” The investigators showed that
feeding rats a high-fat diet for eight weeks made some of them overeat and
gain weight. This excessive eating was associated with an incre ase in
receptors on vagal sensors in the gut for food-stimulating signals and the
development of resistance to the hormone leptin, which reduces appetite.
The Lure of Comfort Foods
If low-grade inflammation can compromise our appetite mechanisms and
negatively affect our brain and our gut, why is it that we crave unhealthy ,
fat-containing foods when we are under stress? Why don’t we nibble on
carrots and apples when we’re stuck in traffic or stressed out over a
looming deadline?
A small number of studies perfo rmed in animals and in healthy human
subjects have identified possible mechanisms for this stress-reducing effect
of fatty and sugary foods. For example, several laboratories had shown that
chronically stressed rats showe d a down-regulation of their stress system
when they were allowed to eat high-fat or sugary drinks, compared to those
given no such “comfort foods.” Similarly , when adult rats who had
experienced early life adversity (the stressful maternal separation paradigm
after they were born) were allowed to eat a highly palatable, high-fat diet,
this eating pattern actually reversed the up-regulation of their stress
response system and reduced their anxiety- and depression-like behaviors.
Inspired by the findings of these mouse studies, several investigators
explored whether human subjects experience similar positive effects from
eating comfort food when they’re stressed or in a negative emotional state.
Janet Tomiyama  and her team in the Department of Psycho logy at
UCLA  investigated whether the stress responsiveness of healthy  subjects to
an acute  laboratory stressor was related to a history of higher consumption
of comfort foods after stressful events, and also whether this was reflected
in a greater degree of obesity . They based their hypothesis on the fact that
animals accumulate fat in the belly area through repeated consumption of
highly palatable foods, which in turn leads to inhibition of the stress
response system  in chronically stressed animals. To test their theory , they
exposed fifty-ni ne healthy women to a stressful laboratory task. They
measured levels of the stress hormone cortisol in the subjects’  blood and
charted their subjective experi ence of stress while performing the task.
Consistent with the researchers’  hypothesis and the animal literature, the
women who had the lowest stress ratings and the lowest cortisol response
were the most likely to report a history of stress-related eating of comfort
food and also had the greate st degree of obesity . Even though other
explanations of these findings are possible, they suggest that women who
regularly eat comfort foods when stressed dampen their physiological
response to stress. Unfortunately , this food-induced stress reduction comes
at the cost of weight gain and all the other detrimental changes in our
bodies and brains.
Lukas Van Oudenhove, a psychiatrist at the University of Leuven in
Belgium, studied subjective reports and brain responses using fMRI
(functional magnetic resonance imaging) in healthy volunteers to evaluate
the effect of fat ingestion on a variety of subjective parameter s, including
personal ratings of mood, and responses in specific emotional brain regions.
A feeling of sadness or neutrality was induced by having subjects listen for
thirty minutes to sad or neutral classical music while at the same time being
shown images of faces expressing sad or neutral emotions. Fat was then
infused directly into the stomach of the experimental subjects via a small
plastic feeding tube, while water was infused in other subjects as a control
condition. The ratings of mood  and the activation of the emotional brain
regions during the negative stimulus clearly demonstrated both an increase
of feelings of sadness and an increase in brain reactions. When the subjects
received the infusion of fatty acids into their stomach, both the subjective
feelings of sadness and the associated emotional brain responses were
reduced—supporting the idea that high fat intake can have an emotionally
comforting effect. We have already learned how the gut, its enteroendocrine
cells, and the vagus nerve respond to the presence of fat in the small
intestine. Based on these interactions, we can speculate that the fatty acids
improved the subjects’  mood by stimulating the release of signaling
molecules from the gut, which reached emotional brain regions via the
circulation or via increased signaling of the vagus nerve.
Unfortunately , the ill effects of unhealthy eating habits on our brain and
behavior are not limited to appetite control and our responses to stress.
Recent scientific evidence has linked such habits to even more serious
consequences of altered brain function.
Food Addiction: The Effect of a High-Fat Diet on
Food Cravings
While the term “addictive behavior” is generally used in connection to
drugs and alcohol as well as compulsive sexual behaviors, the term has
recently been applied to the eating of food in general, and also to the
consumption of specific foods such as sugar . We now know that in some
vulnerable individuals, food may evoke psychopharmacological and
behavioral responses similar to those produced by repeated use of other
stimulants.
How much food you eat is controlled by three closely interacting
systems in your brain: in additi on to the appetite control system regulated
by the hypotha lamus, there are two other brain systems that play a
prominent role: the dopamine reward system, and the executive control
system, located  in your brain’ s prefrontal cortex, which can voluntarily
override all other control systems if needed. In the world of hunter -
gatherers, characterized by limit ed food supplies and high energy needs, the
urge to eat was driven by the constant existential need of their bodies for
food (experienced subjectively as a gut feeling of hunger). This basic
caloric needs assessment system was assisted by the reward system,
providing the drive and motivation to search for food. Dopamine-containing
nerves, which make up large portions of the brain’ s reward network,
promise a major reward if we pursue a certain action. They play a major
role in modulating the motivation and sustainability of behaviors necessary
to obtain the reward, in this case the drive and motivation to forage for
food.
Not surprisingly , there are very close connections between the brain’ s
reward system and the networks involved in appetite regulation. For
example, a number of gut hormones and signaling molecules influence
activity in the dopaminer gic reward pathway: several appet ite-boosting
signals increase the activity of dopamine-containing cells, while certain
appetite-suppressing signals decrease dopamine release. In addition, nerve
cells in key regions of the reward system, such as the nucleus accumbens,
express receptor s for various gut hormones involved in appetite regulation:
appetite-suppressing hormones, such as leptin, peptide YY, and glucagon-
like peptide, decrease the sensitivity of the reward system, while appetite-
stimulating hormones such as insulin and ghrelin increase it.
Millions of years of evolution have optimized this elaborate interaction
between reward and appetite for a world of limited and difficult-to-obtain
food supplies, a situation that has existed for the great majorit y of human
existence on this planet. However , this hardwiring of our brain systems
related to food intake loses much of its adaptive value in the world most of
us inhabit today . In our modern  industrialized society , with its easy access
to highly palatable food and dramatically reduced levels of physical
activity , the drive of the reward system can easily overwhelm  the control
system computi ng our daily caloric needs, and often has to be controlled
voluntarily to avoid overeating and weight gain. Now imagine a scenario in
which one of these control systems has been switched off and there is a
limited capacity of voluntary control mechanisms to make up for it. This is
exactly the situation I described earlier when explaining how chronic high
fat intak e can compromise the hypothalamus’ s ability to respond to satiety
signals from the gut. Not everyb ody has the discipline to say “no” to a side
dish of french fries, or when shown the dessert menu in a restaurant!
One of the behaviors that can result from this remodeling of our appetite
control mechanisms is food addiction. This term was coined by Nora
Volkow , directo r of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, based on the
astonishing neurobiological similarities between the brain mechanisms that
underlie substance abuse and chronic overeating. Based on questionnaire
data, it’s estimat ed that at least 20 percent of obese individuals  suffer from
food addiction. Certain foods, especially high-calorie foods rich in fat and
sugar , have been shown to trigger addictive eating behavior in both animals
and humans. Our own group’ s work at UCLA  has identified structural and
functional chan ges in key regions of the brain’ s reward system among
overweight and obese (but otherwise healthy) subjects. These mechanisms
not only promote overeating but also produce learned associations, also
known as conditioned responses , between the stimulus of the food and the
reward signals in the brain. The prime importance of these conditioned
responses is the reason our living rooms are flooded with TV commercials
showing images of food that is both highly palatable and high in fat. In
most people these images will stimulate the brain’ s reward system, which
has been  programmed througho ut evolution to seek out foods with high
caloric density , in particular fat and refined sugars. This reaction on its own
is a desirable outcome for advertisers, since it instills a positive conditioned
response to their products. In individuals who suffer from food addiction,
however (and in whom the normal appetite control system has been
compromised by a low-grade inflammatory state), viewing these images
will actually create a craving to go to the kitchen, or to pick up the phone
and order such foods for home delivery .
In times  when food was scarce and an animal had to maxima lly take
advantage of any situation that provided access to food, this ability of
palatable foods  to stimulate overconsumption—and to encode strong
memories that increase our cravings for them—had major evolutionary
advantages. Among other things , it helped ensure that we splur ged on these
calorie-rich sources when we found them, and that we remembered where
to find them in the future. In environments where such foods are plentiful
and ubiquitous, however—as it is in many parts of the world today—this
property has become a danger ous liability . In modern society , palatable
foods, like drugs of abuse, represent a powerful environmental trigger ,
which can facilitate or exacerbate uncontrolled eating behavior in
vulnerable individuals.
As explained earlier , there is good evidence that the dominance of
hedonic food seeking may be caused by the inactivation of the
hypothalamic control system by the metabolic toxemia. But there’ s also
recent evidence  suggesting that such unrestricted activity of the reward
system in food-addicted individuals may further compromise gut function.
In a recent study of individuals suffering from alcohol depend ence, it was
shown that cravings for alcohol during periods of abstinence were
positively correlated with the individuals’  intestinal permeability (how
leaky their guts were) and with changes in their gut microbiota. Given the
strong engagem ent of the brain’ s stress response during craving and the
well-known effects of stress on gut permeability , it’s conceivable that the
permeability effects in this study were related to a craving-related (and
stress-related) increase in the gut’s leakiness and the observed changes in
gut microbial composition and metabolic function.
The idea that our gut microbes may influence our reward system and
play a role in food addiction has led to many speculations about the
relationship between ourselves and our gut microbiome, even questioning
the idea of free will. In a provoc ative review article, Joe Alcock, a professor
at the University of Mexico, recently suggested that gut microbes may be
under strong selective pressure  to manipulate human eating behavior in
ways that increase their own fitness, sometimes at the expe nse of our
health. This hypothesis is not as far-fetched as it may seem at first glance;
we only need to remember the sophisticated ways that some microbial
organisms, such as the Toxoplasma gondii  parasite, can manipulate the
behavior of animals. Alcock and his coauthors proposed that gut microbes
might do this through two potential interacting strategies. On the one hand,
by hijacking our dopamine-dri ven reward system, they may be able to
generate cravings for particular foods that they are specialized to consume
and that give them an advantage over competitive microbial species. A good
example would be the competitions between microbial groups of the
Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes taxa and between Bacterioides and Prevotella.
Second, they may create negative mood states—causing us to feel
depressed, for example—that don’t go away until we eat certain food
components that benefit these gut microbes.
The drive to eat so-called comfort food and the concept of food
addiction are both excellent examples of behaviors that could potentially be
manipulated by certain types of gut microbiota to provide them  with their
preferred foods.  While these concepts currently belong to the realm of
speculative science, that is, speculations based on incomplete scientific
evidence, they are intriguing hypotheses that will need to be tested
scientifically in the future.
If you are not already worried enough about your diet—there ’s more.
Fat is far from the only threat to your brain-gut-microbiome axis lurking in
the North American diet. And as we will learn, the gut microbes play an
important role in this threat.
How Industrial Agriculture Affects Your Gut and
Brain
Growing up in the Bavarian Alps, hardly a summer weekend went by when
my dad and I weren’ t hiking in the local mountains. Watching the cows
grazing on grassy alpine meadows sprinkled with wildflowers was a
familiar experien ce. Yet, at the time, I didn’ t pay much attention to it, and I
had no clue that I would once return to these childhood images with
important scientific questions. The farmers would sell unpasteurized milk in
small mountain restaurants directly from these happy and healthy-looking
animals. All the dairy products that we ate in our family came from these
animals roaming  free in the mountains, and there was a general awareness
that every product that came from them was natural, healthy , and delicious.
When I spoke at a gastroenterology conference in Garmisch, an idyllic
resort town at the bottom of Bavaria’ s highest mountain, the Zugspitze, I
had another chance to look at this harmonious relationship between the
farm animals and their environ ment, this time with very different eyes.
While taking a train to reach the top of the mountain for my talk, I looked at
these animals grazing on pristin e meadows surrounded by patches of trees
in glowing fall colors. I couldn ’t help contrasting these images of natural
harmony with the desolate existen ce of cows on a modern cattle feedlot,
which I had seen in Northern California. Such images give the lie to
advertisements from industrial dairies about milk from “happy cows.” In his
book The Missing Micr obes, Martin Blaser provides a more accurate picture
of the modern cattle feedlot:
Cows lined up in small metal pens, row after row of them, with their
heads braced into corn-filled troughs. A dense, pungent odor of cow
manure wafts from miles away . Cows are released into vast feedlots
where they mill around on bare ground, eating all the time,
surrounded by their poop.
Indeed, today’ s farm animals are kept completely separate from their
natural environments and food supplies (grass) for most of their lives.
Fattening of the animals with corn, a food source unsuitable for the cows’
digestive system , leads to disea ses of their digestive system, resulting in a
chronic, low-grade inflammatory state and often superimp osed acute
gastrointestinal infections that require continual administration of
antibiotics.
From what we know about the effect of an unhealthy diet and of chronic
stress on the gut microbes, the gut-based immune system, and the leakiness
of the gut, we can’t escape the suspicions that the products that come from
such chronically diseased animals are not good for our gut microbiota and
not beneficial for our health. So the next time you buy milk, eggs, steak, or
pork chops in the supermarket, be aware that they probably came from
animals whose brain-gut-microbiome axis has been severely modified by
the deplorable conditions in which they’re raised, the chronic stress that is
associated with these living conditions, the unnatural diet they’ve been fed
(not suitable for their digestive system), and the medications they’ve
received—all of which pose unknown risks for the optimal function of our
gut-microbiota- brain interactions and for our own health.
Sadly , the situation is not much better in regard to the vegetables, fruits,
and other plant-b ased foods. A common theme shared by animal- and plant-
based food production is the massive interference of the corporate
agribusiness with the ecology of farm animals, plants, and microbial
organisms. Industrial farming of corn, soybeans, and wheat is heavily
dependent on fertilizers and pesticides, used to artificially maintain the
growth and dominance of these  plants over competitive plant species such
as weeds and to defend them against pests and harmful insects. The use of
systemic insecticides, which are ultimately incorporated and expressed in
the entire plant and its products, has greatly increased in the last decade.
One of the key reasons why ever-increasing amounts of chemicals are
needed to maintain the “health” and dominance of these plants is the fact
that these monocultures of often genetically modified single-crop fields,
stretching across the landscape for miles, have completely lost their natural
diversity in terms of both the genetic variety of the crops them selves and
the variety of other species that coexist with them. It’s highly likely that
equally drastic changes are occurring in the diversity of microorganisms
living in the soil, in the gut microbiomes of the declining bee and butterfly
populations, and in the microbes living in our own gastrointe stinal tract.
Along the same  lines, the collat eral damage on our gut microb iome of the
increasing deplo yment of weed killers (such as the notorious glyphosate, or
“Roundup”)—necessary to overcome the weeds’  resistance to such
chemicals—remains lar gely unknown, at least to the consumer .
One important question is whether this dual chemical insult on the
natural ecosystems of our environment (where our food comes from) and on
the internal gut microbial ecosystems of our farm animals and ourselves
(which play a major role in maintaining the health of our brains) is
contributing to the dramatic increases in certain brain diseases over the past
fifty years. While the scientific evidence to answer this question is already
available for obesity , we can only speculate at the moment if this also
applies to autism spectrum disorders and neurodegenerative disorders such
as Alzheimer ’s and Parkinson ’s disease. If this question is left to the
corporate world, which benefits  daily from these unsustainable practices of
food production, we’ll never get an answer . Instead we will continue to be
caught in a spiral of ever-increasing doses of antibiotics to keep farm
animals functioning, and chemicals needed to fight today’ s superweeds,
superbugs, and super germs.
Gut Microbes and the Dangers of the Modern
American Diet
Over the past fifty years, Americans have not only consumed steadily
increasing amounts of food additives but salt, sugar , and fat. Many of them
were approved for human use without being tested for their long-term
safety . And even  when they were, they were tested before we had learned
how important the gut microbiome was to our health, and what
intermediary effect they can play between these additives and our brain
health. Safety tests used by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
have largely relied on short-te rm animal models that were designed to
detect whether the additive had a fast-acting toxic effect, whether it
heightened the risk of cancer , or both. None of these short-term tests are
able to inform us about the possible detrimental effects of such additives on
long-term brain health
Today we know that several of the most common types of additives
contribute to the low-grade inflammatory state in our bodies that, along
with our high fat and sugar intake, endangers our bodies and our brains.
Let’s look at them one by one.
Artificial Sweeteners
One of the best examples of the extreme changes that have occurred in our
diet due to food additives is the way the food industry has responded to our
insatiable appeti te for sugars. On the one side, vast amounts of sugar have
been added to a wide range of foods in the form of high-fr uctose corn
syrup, even to food items (like breads and crackers) that we don’t seek out
to satisfy our sweet tooth. On the other hand, artificial sweeteners have
been added to just about anythin g we seek out to reconcile our cravings for
sweet taste with our concern about calories. Introduced more than a century
ago, artificial sweeteners were  developed to let us enjoy sweet foods
without the weight gain and hazardous spikes in blood sugar caused by high
sugar intake. If artificial sweeteners came with mottos, it would be “you can
have your cake and eat it too.” The FDA  has approved six such substances
for use in the United States. Today these chemicals are added in massive
amounts to commonly consum ed foods such as diet sodas, cereals, and
sugar -free desse rts. And they remain popular , even among the scientifically
savvy . At the noon medical conferences in my department at UCLA, Diet
Coke and Diet Pepsi remain the most popular beverage choices with lunch
(not to mention the pastrami sandwiches, full of processed meat) and the
greasy potato chips.
Despite their ubiquity , evidence for their promised health benefits is
mixed at best, and evidence for dangers of artificial sweeteners has
emer ged, including weight gain and increased risk of metabolic diseases
such as type 2 diabetes. For example, Jotham Suez’ s group at the Weizmann
Institute of Science in Jerusalem  showed recently that three commercially
available sweeteners— saccharin, sucralose, and aspartame—can induce
glucose intolerance and signs of metabolic syndrome in mice. These
findings are intriguing enough  by themselves, but what is even more
intriguing is their discovery that the gut microbiota played a major role in
this effect. Suez’ s team proved this conclusion by transplanting stool from
mice that consumed artificial sweeteners into germ-free mice that had never
eaten sweetener s, causing the formerly germ-free mice to develop glucose
intolerance and signs of metabolic syndrome. By analyzing the animals’
microbiota, they noticed that consuming artificial sweetener led Bacteroides
bacteria to flourish in the anim als’ gut, just as a high-fat diet does. This
means that far from helping you lose weight, a diet soda with that fatty
cheesy enchilada could exacerb ate the harm all the fat in that cheese is
doing to your metabolism.
The researchers also showed that sweeteners changed metabolic
pathways in gut microbes so they produce more short-chain fatty acids,
which can be absorbed by the colon, providing additional calories. This
means that when you consume artificial sweeteners, your body enlists your
gut microbiota to harvest more  calories in the colon from the microbial
metabolic products to compensate for the missing sugar available in the
small intestine . It sugge sts that trying to cut calories with artificial
sweeteners won’ t work because your gut, with the help of its microbes, will
just extract proportionally more calories from the food you eat.
The results held for human subjects, too. When Suez’ s group tested
several hundred human subjects , they found that individuals who consumed
artificial sweete ners were heavier , had higher fasting blood sugar levels,
and had altered gut microbiota as well. And their gut microbiota were
clearly responsible. When the investigators transplanted stool from healthy ,
saccharin-consuming subjects into germ-free mice, eating sugar began
causing the animals’  blood sugar to spike to abnormal levels.
These studies provide strong evidence that artificial sweeteners not only
fail to help you lose weight in the short term. They can also be a major
cause of the inflammatory chan ges in your gut-brain axis, which can cause
damage to your body and the brain. It also means that you’d be smart to
scan labels for artificial sweeteners, and avoid them whenever possible.
Food Emulsifiers
Emulsifiers are deter gent-like molecules that help mix two liquid s that don’t
easily mix, like oil and water . The food industry adds them routinely to a
variety of foods, including mayonnaise, sauces, candy , and a range of
bakery product s, in order to create a uniform consistency . You can
recognize them by their chemical names on food labels, such as sorbitan
trisearate in chocolate, polysorb ates in ice cream, and citric acid esters in
processed meat, to name just a few. But these deter gent-like molecules
come with a downside. They can disrupt the protective mucu s layer that
covers the inner surface of the gastrointestinal tract, giving gut microbes
easier access to the gut lining. Food emulsifiers also can disru pt the tight
seal form ed by the intact intestinal lining, enabling gut bacteria to cross and
gain access to nearby immune cells, promoting metabolic toxemia.
To find out whether gut microbes play a role in the detrimenta l effects
of emulsifiers on the gut, Andrew Gewirtz’ s group at Emory University
recently fed low concentrations of two commonly used food emulsifiers—
polysorbate 80 and carboxymethylcellulose—to mice. This induced low-
grade intestinal inflammation, obesity , and features of metabolic syndrome.
The gut microbiota of these animals attached closer to the intes tinal lining,
the mix of microbes in the gut changed, and LPS levels increa sed, just as
they do in animals fed a high-fat diet.
Emulsifiers did not cause these metabolic changes in mice that were fed
antibiotics, suggesting that gut microbiota played a key role. The
investigators further confirmed this when they transplanted stool from the
emulsifier -treated mice to germ -free mice and saw the same metabolic
changes.
Besides the dangers of commonly used food additives for our metabolic
health, there are major implications for the functioning of our gut-
microbiome-brain axis and our brain health. From these experiments, it’s
clear that food emulsifiers, just as animal fat and artificial sweeteners, can
change the profi le of your gut microbiota in a way that is conducive to the
development of low-grade inflammation in your gut, other organs, and in
the brain , includ ing the appetite-control regions of your brain. Too much of
these ingredients and you might be prone to overeating high-calorie foods,
which would only aggravate the inflammation and make the situation
worse. Unfortunately , there is more to be concerned about in our diet that
may af fect brain health.
Vital Gluten
Take a walk down the aisles of any high-end grocery store and you’ll see
gluten-free breads, gluten-free pasta, gluten-free cereal, even  gluten-free
soft drinks or wine. Over the past decade, the so-called gluten-free diet has
skyrocketed in popularity . Today , according to one recent survey , up to one-
third of all adult Americans consume gluten-free products in any given year .
Gluten is a mix of proteins that makes up 12 to 14 percent of the protein
content in wheat, and it’s also found, to a lesser extent, in barley and rye,
and in products made from any of these grains. Wheat is the most widely
grown crop worldwide, and wheat flour , of course, is used to make breads,
pastas, bagels, pizza, cereal, and many other common food items. Gluten is
everywhere in the North American diet.
Gluten is also purified from wheat to create a food additive known as
“vital gluten.” Food manufacturers add vital gluten to a wide  variety of
foods, including bread, breakf ast cereal, and even meat products. Vital
gluten adds many qualities to foods, including an optimal texture and
chewiness of bread, as well as an extended shelf life. It also helps to bind
water and fats in processed meats. Vital gluten is being added to foods that
have some gluten naturally (breads, pasta, pizza, beer) and those that don’t,
including meat products, sauces, and milk—amazingly enough—even
nonfood products and cosmetics. The average American’ s gluten intake
from flour and grains has incre ased more than 30 percent in the past half
century , from 9 pounds per year in 1970 to 12 pounds per year in 2000,
while the consumption of gluten additives mixed into various foods has
increased at least threefold.
Should you even worry about all this extra gluten?
You definitely should if you’re among the 1 percent of the population
that has celiac disease, which causes the immune system to overreact to
gluten and produce antibodies to the lining of the intestine. These antibodies
remain in the body , producing chronic symptoms, including abdominal
pain, diarrhea, weight loss, fatigue, and in severe cases neurological
symptoms—and some of the symptoms can remain even after the patient
stops eating wheat.
Celiac disease has been on the rise for sixty years, and now it affects 1
percent of people worldwide. No one knows exactly why. One proposed
hypothesis is the increased consumption of gluten-containing foods; another
is a chan ge in the immune system, possibly related to the altera tions in the
way the gut-bas ed immune system is trained early on in life by interacting
with foreign microor ganisms. A third hypothesis is related to alterations in
how wheat has been modified and is grown.
You should also be careful if you’re among the small minorit y of the
population with a wheat allergy, in which the immune system produces an
allergy-causing antibody called immunoglobulin E, or IgE, to gluten and
other wheat proteins. Eating wheat can be serious, even life-threatening if
you have wheat allergy, causing hives, nasal congestion, abdominal cramps,
and a swollen mouth or throat that can make it hard to swallow or breathe.
A gluten-free diet will typically  help alleviate symptoms in both of the
above, well-esta blished conditio ns. The widespread availability of gluten-
free products is an enormous help for such individuals to lead lives without
debilitating symptoms.
But if you don’t have any of these symptoms, should you worry about
what vital gluten in foods is doing to your brain? Despite recent widespread
claims that gluten is harmful to every human being, there is currently no
good scientific evidence to support this extreme view . I have yet to meet a
French or Italian person who would give up the consumption of delicious
fresh-baked crispy baguettes, the soft and moist ciabatta bread, or the
savory pasta dishes for the uncertain benefits of freeing themselves from
common ailments that have existed since long before the recent surge in
vital gluten.
Linda Schmidt was convinced that her symptoms must be related to gluten
sensitivity . A middle-aged woman, Schmidt would eat gluten -containing
grains, then hours or days later suffer from a variety of symptoms
resembling irritable bowel syndrome: sensations of bloating, gurgling in her
belly , visible abdominal diste nsion, abdominal pain and discomfort,
irregular bowel habits, fatigue,  and brain fog. Her gastroenterologist had
done a compreh ensive diagnostic evaluation and ruled out celiac disease.
Nevertheless, after reading about gluten sensitivity and hearing discussions
about it in the media, Linda had embarked on a gluten-free diet. According
to Linda, the results were remarkable: Soon after she made the switch, she
said, her digestive symptoms improved, her brain fog lifted, and she felt
generally better than she had for a long time.
I see patients like Linda Schmidt regularly . They do not have a
diagnosis of celiac disease, yet they report dramatic improvem ent of their
IBS symptoms once they switch to a gluten-free diet (though they still come
to see me with their residual symptoms).
It’s possible that popular books and media attention to gluten sensitivity ,
and the promise of a miracle cure for common bothersome gastrointestinal
and often associated symptoms of fatigue, loss of energy, and chronic pain,
have lured many to a gluten-free diet. We may even be witnessing a mass
hysteria around gluten-containin g foods, one that’s fanned by the marketing
campaigns of a multibillion-dollar gluten-free-food industry .
But it’s also possible that the North American diet is doing something to
our brain-gut-microbiome axis, and that Linda Schmidt may have a third
type of gluten-related disorder called nonceliac gluten sensitivity , a
condition that appears to be much more common than celiac disease but
remains poorly understood. Currently available science on this condition is
sketchy at best. Small studies have shown that people with nonceliac gluten
sensitivity do not have abnormal immune reactions and their guts are not
leaky , as one might have expe cted from listening to proponents of the
gluten hypersen sitivity concept. Could it be that the increased amounts of
vital gluten act through gut microbes to produce metabolites that are bad for
our well-being?  Or could it be that rather than gluten itself, it is the
processed foods  with all their other additives, most of which are also high
in vital gluten, that are the main culprits?
The definitive answer to these questions are not yet in, and it may take
science a while to provide it. Believers in the evils of dietary gluten do not
need such scientific confirmation of what they are convinced  is a well-
established disorder . High fat content, artificial sweeteners, food
emulsifiers, and other factors in our diet may have altered the set point of
the myriad of sensors within our gut, including many of the receptors on
nerve endings, enteroendocrine cells, and immune cells. Remember , the gut
is our most complex sensory organ. Such changes may have altered the
signals our gut sends to the enteric nervous system and to our brain. Is it
possible that people with the most sensitive guts—people like Linda
Schmidt—are now showing signs of food sensitivities and food allergies
that they might not previously have developed? They may just be the
canaries in the coal mine, experiencing problems long before the rest of us
notice.
How the North American Diet May Contribute to
Chronic Diseases of the Brain
Aubrey’ s constipation had developed gradually over two years, and by the
time he arrived at my clinic, his symptoms were so severe that he needed
daily laxatives and lots of strain ing to have regular bowel move ments. As I
took his history , Aubrey , who was fifty-five, told me that unless he took
those measures, he might not have a bowel movement for several days.
I listened for clues as to what might be causing Aubrey’ s symptoms. He
was not taking a medication that causes constipation as a side effect, such as
calcium channel  blockers that patients take for high blood pressure. And he
was not in the early stages of depression, which can bring on constipation.
When I asked Aubrey about his dietary habits, there was nothi ng unusual.
He had been eating a typical North American diet for all his life, his favorite
foods being steaks, hot dogs, and hambur gers. I wasn’ t sure at first what
was causing his symptoms, but when I happened to glance at his hands, I
noticed a very slight tremor of his right index finger and thumb.
Tremors like this can be an early symptom of Parkinson’ s disease,
which afflicts more than 7 million people worldwide, includin g 1 million
Americans. The classic symptoms of advanced Parkinson’ s are familiar to
many: character istic hand tremors, slow movement, rigid or stiff muscles,
impaired posture and balance. These symptoms reflect degeneration in
several brain regions that contain  dopamine as a neurotransmitter , which are
involved in motor coordination. But long before these classical neurological
symptoms appear , patients often develop GI symptoms. Such symptoms,
particularly constipation, affect up to 80 percent of Parkinson’ s patients, and
they can precede the onset of the classical neurological symptoms by
decades.
It has long been  known that nerve cells in affected brain regions  contain
so-called Lewy bodies—abnormal clumps of protein that interfere with
nerve function. As the earliest symptoms of constipation develop in the gut,
is it possible that Parkinson’ s disease begins in the gut and gradually makes
its way to the brain? Could Parkinson’ s disease be a gut-brain disorder?
And could the gut’s microbiome be one of the culprits? Based on exciting
new scientific evidence, the answer to all these questions may be yes.
It turns out that the protein that clumps to form Lewy bodies , alpha-
synuclein, exists  not only in patients’  brains, but also in nerve cells within
their gut. In fact, certain nerve cells in the enteric nervous system
degenerate years  before other Parkinson’ s symptoms appear , compromising
the elaborate functioning of the little brain in the gut, slowing peristalsis,
and delaying the transit of stool through the colon. It has been proposed that
a person  might eat food or drink water containing a neurotropic virus—a
virus that preferentially infects nerve cells—which would gradually make
its way through the lining of the intestine into the enteric nervous system.
From there it could move inexorably up the vagus nerve—th e information
superhighway that is so essential to transmit gut sensations to the brain.
From the vagus nerve it could infect the brain stem and move to brain
regions controlling movement and mood.
While no such virus has been identified to date, researchers have
identified changes in patients’  gut microbiota that could make such an
infection proces s easier , or that could promote the growth of such viruses
normally living  in the gut. Gut microbiota under go major shifts in
Parkinson’ s patients, as demonstrated in a recent study performed by Filip
Scheperjans, of the University of Helsinki, and his colle agues. The
investigators found that the microbiota of Parkinson’ s patients had reduced
levels of Prevotella bacteria compared with the microbiota  of healthy
people. Perhaps not coincidenta lly, Prevotella flourish in the guts of people
who eat a plant-based diet, and are reduced in people who eat fewer plants
and more meat, milk, and dairy . We don’t know if these gut microbial
changes in patients with Parkinson’ s disease play any causative role in the
disease, or if they are a consequence of the altered gut environment
associated with Parkinson’ s. And they may only become important when
other factors are in place, such as genetic vulnerability or other
environmental toxins. Many parts of the Parkinson’ s disease puzzle are still
missing. But other types of studies also offer supporting evidence that
Parkinson’ s, too, might be a disease of the brain-gut-microbiome axis. A
vegetarian diet, which shifts the microbiome, lowers the risk of Parkinson’ s
disease, for example. And we know gut microbial diversity wanes later in
life, a period when your gut microbiome becomes more vulnerable to
disturbances. Perhaps not coincidentally , Parkinson’ s usually sets in after
the age of sixty .
If this hypothesi s pans out, then early dietary interventions to calm the
gut’s immune system might help prevent the onset of Parkinson’ s disease in
high-risk patient s, or at least slow its progression. And shifting away from
the typical North American diet may help many people to prevent the onset
of Parkinson’ s.
Rediscovering the Mediterranean Diet
Two years ago, I had the pleasure of visiting my friend Marco Cavalieri and
his lovely wife, Antonella, who own an organic winery in the town of
Fermo, a small town in the Marche region of Italy, just south of Ancona on
the Adriatic coast. It’s a land of rolling hills covered with smal l patches of
bright yellow sunflowers, viney ards, olive trees, and wheat fields that slope
gently to the blue sea. Patches of different plants and crops are often
separated by rows of trees, bush es, and cornflowers, creating an unintended
design masterpiece that embodies themes of beauty , harmony , and
connectedness. The visual appeal of the scenery is a reflection of an
incredible divers ity of plants used in agriculture. When we arrived at nine
thirty in the evening, we expect ed only that we would share a light dinner
with our friends . Instead our hosts welcomed us at a restaurant close to the
Piazza del Popo lo. Fully consistent with its name, which means Place of the
People, the piazza was filled with groups of townspeople engaged in
conversations and children playing soccer . After we were greeted by the
restaurant owner , a friend of the Cavalieris, a series of small, delicious
dishes appeared on our table in sequence: whole-grain lasagna as an
appetizer , brisket goose, seasonal roasted vegetables, chicory, grilled
octopus, pecorino cheese, and local olives. All the dishes were prepared
with local olive oil, some of it pressed from olives growing on the same
ancient trees that the Benedictine monks had planted eight hundred years
ago! There was not a trace of animal fat in anything we consumed. By the
end of the evening we had also finished two bottles of organically grown
wine from Marco’ s vineyards.
As families strolled up and down the piazza, Marco explained some of
the unique aspects of how people in this area of Italy grew , harvested, and
consumed their food and wine. The majority of foods people eat originate
less than fifty miles away—from the fresh fish caught in the Adriatic to the
many types of regional cheeses, the olives and fresh fruit, and the wild
boars and deer hunted in the fall. The geographically restricted food supply
meant there was a strong seaso nal pattern to the types of meals that were
prepared, based on the availability of local food ingredients. The emphasis
on diver se regional products extended to the local wines: different grapes
were grown in soils of different chemical composition in areas that varied in
their closeness to the sea and the amount of sunshine they received.
Fermo is clearly a spiritual place, and not just because it has produced
four popes—statues of whom decorate each side of the piazza. Its history of
agriculture dates back to A.D. 890, when the Benedictine monks came to
the area and established the monastery of Farfa. For four hundred years the
Farfensi monks contributed to the great prosperity of the region, largely
through their farming and their teaching of farming. Following  their belief
in the concept of Ora et labora  (pray and work ), they worked the land,
studied, and wrote down their insights. Many of these handwritten volumes
can still be viewed in the old library adjacent to the piazza.
The first bottle of wine we had with the lasagna was a dry, white wine
made exclusivel y from the pecorino grape. Marco explained that the grape’ s
name comes from its use by the shepherds in the mountains, who also made
the pecorino cheese that we enjoyed with the wine. He also pointed out how
the logo of his winery depicts a monk picking a bunch of grapes so tenderly
that it’s almost a caress. Marco emphasized that this same passion,
attention, and respect for nature  and its products lives on in the Cavalieris’
vineyard, which  is named after the Benedictine monks: “Le Corti Dei
Farfensi.”
By the time we got to the second  bottle—an aged red wine made from a
blend of Montepulciano and Sangiovese grapes from the southern Marche
region—and finished our educat ional meal with a small serving of tiramisu,
I’d learned volumes about the ancient and unique methods by which food
and wine are produced in this part of the world. Most important, I’d come
to realiz e that there is much more to Mediterranean cuisine than a list of
major food components and a meal’s relative amounts of plant- and animal-
based products. What we experienced firsthand in our few days of living in
this environment showed that the close interdependence of historical,
spiritual, enviro nmental, and biological factors contributes significantly to
the impressive health benefits of the Mediterranean diet.
In a pleasant departure from the world of ever-changing fad diets, there
is a remarkable consensus among nutrition experts regarding the health
benefits of the Mediterranean diet and closely related diets.  Traditional
Mediterranean diets have evolved over two thousand years, starting when
the ancient Greeks and Romans dominated the area, with later input from
African and Arab countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea. These
different influen ces have yielded a remarkably high diversity of fruits and
other plant-base d foods that are cultivated, processed, and consumed in
various region-s pecific dishes in countries bordering the sea. A typical
Mediterranean diet contains at least 5 servings of vegetables, 1–2 servings
of legum es and beans, 3 serving s of fruit, 3–5 servings of grains, 5 servings
of plant fats (olive oil, avocado, nuts, and seeds), consumption  of seafood
2–4 times per week, and red meat not more than 1 time per week. The
health benefits of the Mediterranean diet were first systematically studied in
the 1950s and 1960s during the Seven Countries Study , a research project
lead by Mayo Clinic investigator Ancel Keys that included subjects from
the town of Montegior gio, which is also in the Marche region of Italy,
where Marco grows his organic grapes and olives. Although the specifics of
the diet vary depending on the country and region, and even though there
have been significant changes in the dietary habits since the time of the
initial study, the basic dietary pattern is characterized by high consumption
of monounsaturated fatty acids—primarily from olive oil—as well as daily
consumption of fruits, vegetables, whole-grain cereals, low-fat dairy
products, and moderate amount s of red wine; weekly consumption of fish,
poultry , nuts, and legumes; and low and infrequent consumption of red
meat. While the average fat content of the Mediterranean diet can range
from 20 percent in Sicily to 35 percent in Greece, the great majority of this
fat comes from plant sources, in particular olive oil. There is an extensive
medical literatur e based on epidemiological studies and clinica l trials that
document the beneficial role of the Mediterranean diet with regard to
mortality from all causes, partic ularly metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular
disease, cancer , cognitive impairment, and depression. The health benefits
were recently confirmed in a large study that combined all the previously
published literature, covering more than half a million people.
The evidence in favor of the Mediterranean diet for brain health is not
limited to large epidemiological  studies. A recent study performed in nearly
seven hundred elderly adults living in the U.S., all of whom underwent
brain imaging studies to identify possible correlations betwee n the brain
and the Mediterranean diet, demonstrated larger volumes in many brain
regions in subjects strictly adhering to a Mediterranean diet compared to
those who did less so. Lower consumption of meat and higher consumption
of fish were the main factors explaining these differences. In another study ,
investigators assessed dietary habits in 146 elderly individuals and studied
their brains nine years later. On the basis of dietary assessment , 26 percent
of participants had a low Mediterranean diet score, indic ating poor
adherence to the diet; 47 percent had medium scores, and 27 percent had
higher scores, represen ting the best adherence to the diet. The investig ators
found a strong association between adherence to the Mediterran ean diet and
brain imaging measures related to the integrity of nerve brain tissue in the
bundles connecting dif ferent brain regions.
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the extensive health
benefits of the Mediterranean diet. Besides the high levels of protective
antioxidants and polyphenols contained in olive oil and red wine, which
have beneficial effects on cellula r health, the anti-inflammatory effect of the
Mediterranean diet on the body is most often cited. Polypheno ls are plant-
based compound s found in a variety of foods and beverages. Besides red
grapes and olives, many other fruits and vegetables are rich sources of
polyphenols, as are cof fee, tea, chocolate, and some nuts.
On a recent October day, I rejoined Marco out in the hills to watch the
annual olive harvest. On a particular day, when about 30 percent of the
olives on the trees have ripened, a massive effort is launched to harvest the
fruit and get it to the processing plant within hours of the harvest. Marco’ s
workers harvest olives from about 1,800 trees in the surrounding s of Fermo,
the majority of which are betw een five hundred and eight hundred years
old! Not only was the age of these trees impressive—their size was as well.
It would take two people to stretch their arms around their twisted trunks,
and their roots extend up to one hundred feet in all direction s, sampling
nutrients from a large area of fertile soil that is teeming with microbe-
producing nutrients. All the efforts of the harvest ritual—the age of the
trees, picking of the mostly green olives, immediate processing in a cold
press facility—are aimed to preserve the maximum amount of polyphenol
content.
Based on scientific analyses that Marco performs on the fresh-pressed
olive oil every year, it is obvious that the polyphenol content in oil made
from these ancient olive trees is severalfold higher than that from younger
trees, where most of the commer cially available oil comes from. I wondered
about the reason underlying the relationship of the age of the tree with the
polyphenol content. Could it be that the trees produce their own longevity
cocktail, in the form of chem ical compounds that keep them healthy ,
productive, and resilient against disease and climate fluctuations? Is there a
relationship between the numb er of healthy and active people in their
nineties whom we saw walking in this area (confirmed by several scientific
surveys), the age and health of this remarkable trees, and the regular
consumption of this medicinal olive oil?
The Mediterranean diet feature s the same high ratio of plant-derived
food products to animal-based foods contained in the prehistoric diets of the
Yanomamis and Hazdas, as well as some of today’ s niche diets, including
pescatarians and vegetarians. We now know that, in addition to the high
levels of complex carbohydrates in this largely plant-based diet, it is the
high levels of polyphenols that exert a beneficial effect on the gut
microbiota. The polyphenols not only come from the daily consumption of
extra virgin olive oil; these health-promoting compounds are also contained
in nuts, berries, and red wine, all of which are essential elements of the
Mediterranean diet. A recent small study has even demonstrated that red
wine ingestion may have a favorable influence on our gut microbiota
composition.
Despite all of the research proving the remarkable benefits of the
Mediterranean diet, we should always be careful not to forget the aspects of
diet less easily measured by science. The feeling of social connectedness
when sharing a delicious meal and the attitude and outlook of those
enjoying can’t be empirically assessed. But if our visit to Fermo is any
indication, these factors likely contribute to the many health benefits of a
Mediterranean meal.
CHAPTER
10
THE SIMPLE ROAD TOWARD WELLNESS AND
OPTIMAL HEALTH
The intense information exchang e between your brain, your gut, and its
microbiota takes place twenty-four hours a day, regardless if you sleep or
are awake, from the day you are born to the day you die. All of that
communication isn’t just coord inating your basic digestive functions—it
also impacts our human experience, including how we feel, how we make
decisions, how we socialize, and how much we eat. And if we listen
carefully , this conversation can also guide us toward optimal health.
We are living in unprecedente d times. What we eat and drink has
changed dramatically , and we are exposed to more chemicals and drugs
than any people who ever lived. We are beginning to learn how these
changes, along with chronic life stress, can affect not only the gut microbes,
but also their complex dialo gue with the gut and the brain. These
conversations play an important, well-established role in common
syndromes of the gastrointesti nal tract, in particular IBS, as well as in some
forms of obesity . And we are beginning to recognize how disturbances in
the gut microb ial world can influence our brain. Recent studies have
implicated altere d brain-gut-mic robiota interactions in brain disorders such
as depression, anxiety , autism, Parkinson’ s, and even Alzheimer ’s disease.
But even  those of us who don’t suffer from these diseases can improve our
health by learning more about this vital conversation.
What Is Optimal Health?
A couple of years ago, a longtime friend of mine, Melvin Schapiro, was
traveling with his wife and two other couples from San Juan, Puerto Rico,
heading for a vacation on a remote island in the Caribbean. Mel and his
friends had done the trip many times in the past; however , on this occasion
something went awfully wrong. The small propeller plane that was carrying
them had inadve rtently been fueled with jet fuel and shortly after takeof f it
crashed. Mel and his fellow travelers miraculously survived, some with
serious injuries requiring hospi talization. Mel sustained sever al fractured
ribs and a broken vertebra as well as a deep gash in his lower leg that
required minor surgery at the local trauma center . Within hours of the injury
he was flown back to Los Angeles for hospitalization and further medical
care. Now here comes the most remarkable part of the story: despite these
traumatic and emotional injuries, he was soon walking with crutches and
just three weeks after the accident was working in his office and preparing
for an important medical conference only a month away .
Only a small percentage of people in the United States live in a state of
optimal health, a condition that has been defined as comple te physical,
mental, emotional, spiritual, and social well-being, with peak vitality ,
optimal persona l performance, and high productivity . In other words, it’s a
person who not only has no bothersome physical symptoms but is also
happy , optimisti c, has lots of friends, and enjoys his or her work . My friend
Mel is such a unique individual.  Every once in a while, we read about these
people in the news, people like Fauja Singh, the so-called Turbaned
Tornado, who began running at eighty-nine and completed the London
marathon at 101. “Life is a waste without humor—living is all about
happiness and laughter ,” Singh says.
Several colleagues of mine in their late seventies and even eighties
remain fully active, healthy , and highly productive, pursuing their research,
teaching students, seeing patients, conducting large international studies,
and traveling around the world talking about their work at scientific
meetings. If there is one personal characteristic that stands out among all of
them, it is their curiosity and excitement about all things in life, their
positive view of the world, and their unwillingness to be bogged down by
negative people  or events. Their gut-based decisions seem  to have a
consistently positive bias, assuming that no matter what, they will be okay .
It is also not uncommon to hear stories of a remarkable abilit y to bounce
back from health issues—such as my friend’ s plane crash— or personal
losses such as the death of a spouse. All these individuals seem  to have a
high degree of resilience—an ability to return to a healthy steady state after
unanticipated events in life have thrown them of f balance.
It has been estimated that superhealthy people make up less than 5
percent of the North American population. Optimal health has been a
popular topic in the lay media, but it is not a goal that physicians are trained
to help their patients achieve. Traditionally , a large part of our health care
system—a more  appropriate name for it would be our disease care system
—has focused almost exclusiv ely on treating the symptoms of chronic
disease, maximizing its efforts on expensive screening diagnostics and
equally expensive long-term pharmacological treatments.  Similarly ,
federally funded biomedical research is almost exclusively focused on
unraveling disease mechanisms and not on identifying the biological and
environmental factors that contribute to a state of optimal health.
Much more common than the superhealthy are people like Sandy , a highly
successful, middle-aged, divorced professional living on the West Side of
Los Angeles. Sandy had been struggling to meet her professional
obligations and be a good mother to her two teenage daughters. Although
she had a sensiti ve stomach for as long as she could remember , she, like the
majority of people with such mild sensitivities, always considered herself
healthy and had never consulted a physician for her symptoms. But she had
noticed that she was getting tired more easily , didn’ t have as much energy
as she used to, woke up in the morning feeling tired, and had gained fifteen
pounds over the past year. She flew to the East Coast several times a month,
often on a red-eye, and she had noticed that it took her longe r to recover
from the trip than in the past.
Sandy hadn’t spent much time thinking about her digestive system until
recently , except when she listen ed to the ubiquitous television commercials
talking about beneficial effects of probiotic yogurts for digestive wellness,
or the talk-show guests discussi ng the dangerous effects of gluten. She had
read about the health benefits of a gluten-free diet for a wide range of
symptoms similar to hers, and she was interested in getting my advice on
how to optimize her gut microbiome through simple, specific dietary
interventions.
Sandy is one of the large and growing proportion of the population who
live in a state of suboptimal health you could call a “predis ease” state.
These people have received no official medical diagnosis. Their blood tests
have turned up no biochemical evidence suggesting early disea se. But they
are likely to feel chron ically stressed and worried, and it takes them longer
to return to a relaxed state after a stressful experience. They are also more
likely to be overweight or obese, have borderline elevated blood pressure,
experience low-grade chronic digestive discomfort (ranging from heartburn
to bloati ng and irregular bowel habits), and have limited time and energy
for a fulfilling social life. They often experience poor sleep, loss of energy,
symptoms of fatigue, and recurrent aches and pains in their bodies, in
particular low back pain and headaches. They may also consider these
symptoms as the price they have to pay for making a living for their family ,
or for a career in the fast lane. Even though such individuals  often don’t
meet the diagnostic criteria doctors use to make a speci fic medical
diagnosis, such as IBS, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, or mild
hypertension, it is possible to identify several characteristic abnormalities
on speci alized tests, including markers of systemic inflammat ion in their
bodies.
Such predisease  states can be viewed as the consequences of the wear
and tear on the body (the so-called allostatic load), which increases over
time when a person experiences repeated minor stressors or is under
constant, chroni c stress. Many of us live in such a stressful world, but the
wear and tear is harder on some individuals than on others. Repeated or
prolonged activation of the stress circuits in the brain harms our metabolic,
cardiovascular , and brain health. Allostatic load also has a majo r impact on
our brain-gut-microbiome axis, presumably because our gut reactions affect
gut microbial behavior . As the allostatic load increases, our gut microbes
and their conne ction to the brain play a major role in mediating systemic
inflammation. As inflammation worsens, levels of inflammatory markers in
the bloodstream rise, including LPS, adipokines (signaling molecules
produced by fat cells), and a substance called C-reactive protein.
As we have learned, diet can interact with our gut microbiota to cause
similar inflamm atory states, a situation called “metabolic toxemia.” There  is
good reason to believe that several decades of metabolic toxemia in an
otherwise healthy individual is enough to cause profound structural and
functional changes to the brain.
Even more worrisome, gut reactions from chronic stress and a high-fat
diet can combine to exacerbate the inflammatory state. They do so by
increasing the gut’s leakiness, making the gut microbiota more likely to
activate the gut’s immune system. High stress levels also drive many people
toward the temptation of comfort foods, which then can make up-regulated
stress circuits in the brain the new normal, which in turn further exacerbates
inflammation in the gut in a vicious cycle.
The combination of feeding our gut microbes a diet high in animal fat,
and the chronic wear and tear on our brain associated with chronic stress,
represents the perfect storm to push us at some point—likely triggered by
other , yet unknown factors—fro m the predisease state into such common
health problems as metabolic syndrome, coronary vascular disease, cancer ,
and degenerative brain diseases.
Was I able to give Sandy sound medical advice, and answer her
question about how to develop a healthy gut microbiome? And was I able to
advise her how to move from the focus on her predisease state toward a
goal of optimal health? The answer is yes. I strongly believe that everybody
is able to work  toward optimal health by focusing on estab lishing and
maintaining balance within their gut-microbiome-brain axis. How? By
maximizing its resilience.
What Is a Healthy Gut Microbiome?
To keep  our gut microbiomes healthy , we first need to know what
constitutes a healthy gut microbiome.
Since your gut microbiome is an ecosystem, it’s helpful to think of it as
an ecologist would. Think of the human body as a landscape, with different
parts of the body as distinct zones, each of which provides its own distinct
habitat for microor ganisms. These range from the vagina, home to just a
few species, to the mouth, which houses a diverse array of microbes. Even
within the diges tive system, there are distinct zones, including low-diversity
habitats in the stomach and small intestine, and high-diversity habitats in
our large intestine, which has more microbes than any other location in the
body , and the lar gest diversity of microbes as well.
When I asked Daniel Blumstein , an ecologist and UCLA  colleague, to
describe a healthy ecological state, he reminded me that in natural habitats
there can be several stable healthy states. In other words, all ecosystems
display multipl e stable states. In the case of the human  microbial
ecosystem, some stable states are associated with health, and others with
disease.
To visualize the concept of stable states within an ecological system, I
like to think about one of my favorite drives in California. Driving from
Santa Barbara to Monterey on California’ s Highway 1, also known as the
Pacific Coast Highway , I enjoy watching the golden, rolling hills covered
with oak trees and vineyards give way to taller mountains divided by
valleys as you get closer to the coast. Multiple factors have shaped this
beautiful landscape, including the geology , rivers, earthquakes, tectonic
shifts, weather , and the animals that have lived on it for thousan ds of years.
Imagine if you could drop a giant ball onto this landscape from high in the
air and watch it roll. You could  easily predict that it would come to rest in
the valle ys and other depressions. The deeper these depressions are, the
more effort it would then take to roll the ball over a hill into another valley .
In other words, when the ball is in one of these depressions, it is in a stable
state, and the deeper the depression, the more stable that state is.
By analogy , you can represent the microbial ecology of the gut as an
equally hilly landscape on a three-dimensional graph. In this case, the
distance from a depression to a hilltop represents how much energy it takes
to roll the ball up the hill to get over to the next depression—which is what
it takes to switch from one temporarily stable state to another . David
Relman, a pediatrician and leading microbiologist from  Stanford
University , says the most stable microbial states in the gut—the  valleys and
most pronounced depressions—reflect states either of optimal health or
chronic disease.
Many factors determine the landscape of your gut microbiome,
analogous to the factors that have shaped natural landscapes. One important
factor is your genetic makeup and the way these genes are modified through
the influence of early life experiences, good and bad. The activity of your
immune system is also important, as are your eating habits, lifestyle, and
environment and the nature of your unique gut reactions, which  reflect your
habits of mind.
A limite d number of longitudinal studies have been completed on the
composition of the gut microbiota, and they seem to show that dietary
changes, immune function, and the use of medications, in particular
antibiotics, can trigger shifts from one state to another . These shifts can be
temporary , rapid ly switching back to the healthy default state, or persistent,
resulting in chronic disease. So depending on your gut microbial landscape,
you may be more prone to develop prolonged digestive discomfort
following a gut infection or show  unhealthy spikes in blood sugar following
a desser t. This microbial landscape may determine who will benefit more
from switching to a healthy diet or from taking probiotics, and who will be
more sensitive to the ef fects of a course of antibiotics.
FIG. 7. HOW  ANTIBIOTICS, STRESS, AND INFECTIONS CAN CHANGE THE
ECOLOGICAL  LANDSCAPE OF  THE GUT  MICROBIOME
Using terminology from ecology , the gut organization and function of the gut microbiome can
best be conceptualized as a stability landsc ape with hills and valleys; the deeper the valleys, the
more resistant the state is to perturbations. The stability of the state is determined by a variety of
factors including genes and early life events. When the system is perturbed sufficiently , it will
leave its original stable state and move to a new state, which can be stable or transient. Many of
these new states are associated with disea se. The most common perturbations are antibiotics,
infections, or str ess.
Diversity . One of the generally agreed-u pon criteria for a healthy gut
microbiome has been its diversity and the abundance of microbial species
present in it. As in the natural ecosystems around us, high diversity of the
microbiome means resilience and low diversity means vulnerability to
perturbations. Fewer microbial species means a diminished ability to
withstand perturbations such as infections (by pathogenic bacteria, viruses,
or the pathobionts living in our gut), poor diet, or medications.
There are some noticeable exceptions to this rule, including the
microbiota living in the gut of a newborn and in the vagina, which have low
microbial diversity when they’re healthy , and for good reasons. The
newborn’ s microbiome needs flexibility in order to create a pattern of
communities of gut microbes during the early programming period, which
is unique for each individual. The vaginal microbiome needs flexibility in
order to adjust its function to the unique demands of reproduction and
delivery . Nature  has developed clever alternative strategies to ensure the
stability of these unique habitats and protect them from infections and
disease. Both habitats are dominated by lactobacilli and bifidobacteria.
These bacteria can produce many antimicrobial substances, and they have
the unique ability to produce enough lactic acid to create an acidic milieu
that is hostile to most other microor ganisms and pathogens.
Someone with low-diversity , relatively unstable gut microbial
communities may never show any signs of overt disease. However , when
the microbiota of such high-ri sk individuals are perturbed, diseases are
more likely to develop. A growing scientific literature demonstrates that
diseases such as obesity , inflammatory bowel disease, and other
autoimmune disorders are associated with reduced gut microbial diversity ,
often as a consequence of repea ted exposure to antibiotics. Other diseases
may join this list in the future.
Unfortunately , it seems easier to reduce gut microbial diversity in an
adult than to increase it above the level of diversity established during the
first three years  of life. For example, it is relatively easy to decrease gut
microbial diversity at any age by taking antibiotics, but studies suggest it’s
difficult to increase our norm al level of microbial diversity , thereby
increasing our resilience again st disease and improving our health. No
matter how many probiotic pills you swallow , how much sauerkraut and
kimchi you consume, and how extreme a diet you select, your basic gut
microbial composition and diversity will remain relatively stable.
That’ s no reason to throw up your hands, however . We know that
probiotic interventions can benefit your gut health by altering the
metabolites that your microbiot a produce. The impact of such a probiotic
intervention on the health of your gut microbes may be greater during the
first few years in life, when the microbiome is still developing, or following
the decimation of your gut microbial diversity from intake of a broad-
spectrum antibiotic, or during chronic life stress.
How does gut microbial diversity protect against disease? Diversity is
closely linked to two critical properties of healthy ecosystems—stability
and resilience.
Stability and resilience. Although you may carry different microbial
species than your coworker or cousin, you tend to carry the same key set of
species for long periods. This stability is critical for your health and well-
being. It ensures that friendly  gut microbes can return quickly to an
equilibrium state following a stress-related perturbation, which allows them
to keep up their beneficial activ ities over time. This makes a microbiome
resilient.
Conversely , some people’ s gut microbiota are especially sensitive to
perturbation. Mrs. Stone, who developed protracted symptoms of a
gastroenteritis during her vacation in Mexico, clearly started out with a gut
microbiome that was less resilient and stable than that of her fellow
vacationers. Was her microbial landscape altered by the chronic stress she
was under at the time of her vacation? Or did she start out with a less stable
microbial landscape from the first years of her life, when a series of early
adverse life events permanently changed it?
The emerging ecological view of gut microbial health contrasts with
claims promoted by the food supplement industry and by the media that a
healthy microbio me is composed of defined populations of specific species
of micro bes. In fact, only 10 percent of gut microbial species are shared
between individ uals. In other words, you and a friend might both have a
healthy microbiome, but you might have vastly different communities of
gut microbes. Put another way, there are several stable healthy states of the
gut microbiota.
All this means that no quick analysis of your gut bacterial species—for
example, your ratio of Prevotella to Bacteroides, or Firmicutes to
Bacteroidetes—can assess the integrity of your gut-brain axis and your
health status. It also means that it’s really not possible to provide a one-size-
fits-all recommendation about which probiotics to take or which dietary
intervention will provide specific benefits.
Vastly different communities of gut microbes, however , can produce
very similar patterns of metabolites. This suggests that future tests will
assess gut microbiome health not simply by looking for specific microbial
populations, but by looking at which genes are expressed and which
metabolic pathways are active.
We cannot expect that any simple intervention by itself, such as a
particular diet, will optimize your gut microbiome, while not paying
attention to all the other factors  that influence gut microbial function, like
the influence of unhealthy gut reactions associated with stress , anger , and
anxiety at the same time. Nor will simply eating your daily  probiotic-
enriched yogurt while continuin g your high-animal-fat, low-plan t-food diet,
trying out kimc hi or sauerkraut for a short period of time, or eliminating
grains, complex  carbohydrates, or gluten from your diet. None of these
interventions by themselves will improve a chronically disturbed dialogue
between the gut and the brain. Switching to a gluten-free diet even though
you have no evidence for celiac disease will make the billion-dollar gluten-
free industry happy , but in most cases it will not have any long-lasting
effect on your own well-being and health. The science now says that
changing your diet is not enough. You need to modify your lifestyle as well.
When Is the Time to Invest in Optimal Health?
The brain-gut-m icrobiome axis is most vulnerable to health-harming
perturbations during three periods: from pregnancy through infancy (the
perinatal period) , adulthood, and old age. And scientists now agree that the
first few years in life, starting during development in the womb, matter
most for our long-term health and well-being.
Our gut-microbiota-brain interactions are shaped early in life, from
before birth to age eighteen, through our interactions with the world—our
psychosocial influences, diet, and chemicals in our food (including
antibiotics, food additives, artificial sweeteners, and more). Early life—
from before birth to age three—is a particularly crucial period for the
shaping of the gut microbial architecture. Both the microbiome and brain
circuits are still developing, and changes during this time tend to persist for
life. Furthermore, gut sensations and associated emotional feelings are
being filed into the database in your brain, shaping for life your background
emotions, temperament, and ability to make beneficial gut decisions.
Throughout adult life, both what we eat and how we feel exert a
profound influe nce on the chemical conversations our gut microbes have
with other key players in our intestine, including immune cells, hormone-
and serotonin-containing cells, sensory nerve endings, and more . This “gut-
based caucus” sends signals back to the brain, influencing our desire to eat,
our stress sensit ivity, how we feel, and how we make our gut decisions.
Meanwhile, our emotions, and their associated gut reactions, exert a
profound influence on the complex dialogue in our gut, and this exerts a
large influence on what type of messages the gut sends back to the brain.
The consequences of altering the gut-microbiota-brain dialogue may not
manifest until later in life, when the diversity and resilience  of the gut
microbiota both decrease. This makes it likely to make us more  vulnerable
to developing degenerative brain disorders such as Alzheimer ’s or
Parkinson’ s disease. To prevent these devastating disorders, we need to pay
attention to how we treat our gut-brain-microbiota axis much earlier in life,
long before the damage of the brain manifests as serious symptoms.
Improving Your Health by Targeting the Gut
Microbiome
As we rapidly untangle the complex chemical conversations between
microbes, the gut, and the nervous system, we’re also extracting valuable
information about how to apply this knowledge to improve people’ s health.
But before we can offer evidence-based recommendations, we have
important research questions to answer . David Relman, the Stanford
University microbiology expert, has recently summarized them: What are
the most important processes and factors that determine human microbiota
assembly after birth? Does the mix of gut microbes as a child alter your risk
of health and disease as an adult ? What are the most important determinants
of microbiome stability and resilience? How can you make your gut
microbiota more  stable and resilient, and how can you restore  it to health
when it’s not? To answer these and other questions, we need carefully
designed clinical studies that assess multiple, possibly interacting disease
factors, including the microbiome.
Down the road, if we could assess a person’ s gut microbial landscape
and signaling molecules generat ed in this system, we could determine his or
her vulnerability to antibiotics, stress, diet, and other destabilizing factors
and design personalized treatme nts that could prevent the development of
diseases, or restore the gut microbiome to health—through lifestyle
modifications, dietary interventions, or future medical therapies. A recent
study demonstrated that customized dietary recommendations improved
blood sugar control following a meal, based on multiple personal factors,
including the gut microbiome configuration.
We might also be able to spot early warning signs in the microb iome of
future diseases of the body or the brain. A gut microbial analysis from a
simple stool sample could become one of the most powerful screening tools
in health  care. This could help detect particular diseases, or vulnerability to
particular diseases, including poorly understood brain-gut disorders such as
autism spectrum disorders, Parkinson’ s disease, Alzheimer ’s disease, and
depression.
Novel therapies are possible. Microbiologists and CEOs of start-up
companies are busy mining the human gut microbiome for novel therapies,
using new computational tools. They’ve already found a wealth of new drug
candidates within the human microbiota. They also hope  to patent
genetically engineered probiotic microbes to treat variou s diseases,
including anxiet y, depression and brain-gut disorders like IBS or chronic
constipation, by changing a patient’ s gut microbial architectu re. But this
may prove more difficult than they think. Microbiota consist of many
interacting species, which makes it difficult to control, add, or target
individual speci es without affecting the overall ecological balance. In the
distant future, expensive new treatments that use nanotechnologies and
genetically engineered probiotics to manipulate our own microb iota may be
able to target individual microb es within a complex ecosystem, but for the
foreseeable future, it may not be the practical way to go.
Instead, there are approaches that anyone can take today without
spending a lot of money . In a recent Science article, Jonas Schluter and
Kevin Foster , of the University of Oxford, propose that we act as
“ecosystem engineers” and manipulate general, system-wide properties of
microbial comm unities to our benefit. This implies that you have a basic
understanding of the building plans of the system and should  always be
skeptical of simplistic solutions that are promoted with the promise to
optimize your health.
How can we do this?
Practice natural and organic farming of your  gut micr obiome .
Consider your gut microbiome as a farm and your microbiota as your own
personal farm animals, then decide what to feed them to optimize their
diversity , stability , and health, and optimize production of beneficial
signaling molecules that affect our brains. Would you feed them  food items
that you knew were loaded with potentially harmful chemicals  or enriched
with unhealthy additives? This will be the first step in taking  control of
what you eat. It will increase your awareness next time you go to the
market, are tempted to buy fast food for lunch, or debate whether you
should order a dessert.
Cut down on animal fat in your  diet. All the animal fat in the typical
North American diet, regardless if it is visible or hidden in many processed
foods, is bad for your health. It plays a major role in increasing your
waistline, and recent data has shown that processed meat, which has a
particularly high fat content, enhances your risk of developing several types
of malig nancies, including cancers of the breast, colon, and prostate. High
animal fat intake is also bad for your brain health. There is growing
evidence that dietary fat–induce d changes in gut microbial signaling to the
brain via the gut’s immune system can change our nervous system both
functionally and structurally . Since our brain-gut axis has not evolved to
cope with a daily avalanche of fat and corn syrup, and a high-fat  diet sets up
a viciou s cycle of dysregulated eating behavior that harms your brain
health, become aware of these unhealthy consequences.
Maximize your  gut micr obial diversity . If you want to maximize your gut
microbial diversity , increase its resilience, and reduce your vulnerability to
chronic diseases of the brain, follow the old advice of nutritionists,
cardiologists, and public health officials: in addition to eating moderate
quantities of meats low in fat, mainly from fish and poultry , increase your
intake of food items that contain multiple prebiotics in the form of different
plant fibers, a combination of food items that we know today leads to
greater gut microbial diversity .
Indigenous people living in the Amazonian rain forest know hundreds
of dietary and medicinal plant s, and eat a large variety of wild animal
products. Over hundreds of thousands of years, our gut sensory mechanisms
have evolved to recognize and encode a large number of such nutritional
and medicinal plant signals. There are an impressive number of gut sensors
that respond to a wide variety of herbs and phytochemicals, from wasabi to
hot peppers, from mint to swee t and bitter tastes, to name just a few. We
know that signals from these herbs and foods are transmitted to the brain
and the enteric nervous system and that they have an important effect both
on our digestion and on the way we feel. Nature would not have come up
with these mechanisms over millions of years of evolution unless they
provided a health benefit.
Learn to listen to your gut, which in this context means to remember
that your gut has evolved an elaborate system to handle a huge variety of
naturally grown vegetables, fruits, and other plant-derived foods, as well as
smaller amounts of animal protein, but that it struggles to handle all the fat,
sugar , and additives that the food industry adds to processed foods. Unless
you have been diagnosed with potentially serious medical disord ers, such as
a specif ic food allergy (such as seafood and peanut allergies) or celiac
disease, try to avoid extreme diets that limit the natural variety of foods, in
particular plant-based food items. Develop your own personalized diet
within the general constraints of the “ground rules” of high-dive rsity foods,
mainly from plant sources.
Avoid mass-pr oduced and processed foods and maximize organically
grown food.  Follow the advice that Michael Pollan gives in his recent
book, Food Rules. Buy only things in the market that look like food. If they
don’t, they most likely will contain food additives that could  harm your
brain, including artificial sweeteners, emulsifiers, fructose corn syrup, and
vital gluten, to name just a few. For the same reasons, watch out for the
hidden dangers in food you buy in the supermarket. Read labels to find out
the components and additives in a food item; try to find out where it comes
from. If you do this regularly , you will often be surprised that your fish or
poultry comes from a country without rules for how these animals are
raised and what they are fed, and how many calories are in a bag of so-
called reduced-fat chips.
Modern food producers have abandoned any consideration of the
complexity of the microbial world and the importance of natural diversity
of life, choosing instead to maximize output and profitability . Industrial
farming of beef, poultry , fish, and other seafood defies ecological
principles, creating patches of devastated ecological landscapes sustainable
only through the use of antibiotics and other chemicals. Furthermore, the
waste produced by these livestock and fish farms, and the antibiotic-
resistant microor ganisms that escape them, harms surrounding habitats as
well. Ultimately , products coming from such surrounding compromised
ecosystems—be it the water , soil, or air—will find their way to you, and
will be a risk for your health.
Reducing the microbial diversity in the soil, on plants, and in the GI
tract of farm animals may ultimately harm our own gut microbiome and our
nervous system.  Keep in mind that pesti cides used to grow GMO foods may
not directly harm our human bodies, but they are likely to affect the
function and health of our gut microbes and their interactions with the
brain. The same holds true for residues of low-dose antibiotics that remain
in many mass-produced meat and seafood products.
Eat ferm ented foods and probiotics.  While the science is still evolv ing,
it’s still prudent to maximize your regular intake of fermented food products
and all types of probiotics to maintain gut microbial diversity , especially
during times of stress, antibiotic intake, and old age. All fermented foods
contain probiotics—live microor ganisms with potential health benefits, and
a few commercially available probiotics contained in fermented milk
products, drinks, or in pill form have been evaluated for their health
benefits. Unfort unately , there are also hundreds of such products in all
shapes and forms, whose produ cers make vague claims of health benefits.
Yet for many of them, we don’t even know if enough live organisms reach
your small and large intestine to exert their claimed beneficial effects. But
people have been eating naturally fermented, unpasteurized foods for
thousands of years, and you might want to include some of them in your
regular diet. Such products include kimchi, sauerkraut, kombucha, and
miso, to name just a few. Variou s fermented milk products, including kefir,
different types of yogurts, and hundreds of different cheeses, provide
probiotics as well. I recommend selecting low-fat and low-sugar products
that are free of emulsifiers, artificial coloring, and artificial sweeteners.
If you consume fermented dairy products, such as probiotic-enriched
yogurts, you are also feeding your own microbes an importan t source of
prebiotics (such as the milk oligosaccharides we discussed in the previous
chapter), and if you’re eating fermented vegetables, you’re feeding your gut
microbes anothe r form of prebiotics, such as dietary fiber from complex
plant carbohydrates. Probiotic bacteria you eat as an adult do not become a
permanent part of your gut microbiota, but regular intake of probiotics may
help to maintain gut microbial diversity during times of trouble, and it can
normalize the pattern of metabolites produced by your gut microbes.
Be mindful of prenatal nutrition and stress. If you’r e a woman of
reproductive age, it is equally important to remember that your diet will
influence your child as well—f rom pregnancy , through childb irth and the
period of breastfeeding, until the child is three years old, when his or her
gut microbes are fully established. The maternal gut microbiome produces
metabolites that can influence fetal brain development, and diet-induced
inflammation of the gut-microbiome-brain axis may harm a fetus’ s
developing brain. In fact, full-blown inflammation during pregnancy is a
major risk factor for brain disea ses such as autism and schizop hrenia, and
low-grade inflam mation from a mother ’s high-fat diet may be sufficient to
adversely affect the fetal brain development in more subtle ways. On the
other hand, stress during pregnancy or maternal stress when the child grows
up has well-documented negati ve effects on the development of the brain
and the gut microbiota, often resulting in child behavioral problems.
Eat smaller  portions.  This limits the calories you consume, keeping the
amount in line with your body’ s metabolic needs, and simultaneously
reduces your fat intake. When eating packaged foods, be aware of the
recommended serving size on the label. The calorie count on your potato
chip bag may seem reasonable , but it refers to eating just a few chips.
Eating the whole bag may serve up far more calories and fat than what you
want to eat that day .
Fast to starve your  gut micr obes. Periodic fasting has been an integral
part of many cultures, religion s, and healing traditions for thousands of
years, and prolonged fasting may have positive impact on brain functions
and well-being. A popular explanation for the benefits of fasting is based on
the idea that it cleanses the gut and the body by getting rid of harmful and
toxic substances . Even though people have believed this throughout history ,
there is little scientific evidence  for this hypothesis. But based on what we
now know about brain-gut-microbiota interactions, fasting may have a
profound effect on the composition and function of your gut microbiome
and possibly on your brain.
Recall that when your stomac h is empty , it activates period ic high-
amplitude contra ctions that slowly but forcefully sweep from the esophagus
to the end of the colon. At the same time, the pancreas and the gallbladder
secretion release a synchronized burst of digestive juices. The combined
effect of this reflex, called the migrating motor complex, is analogous to a
weekly neighbo rhood street sweeping. We don’t yet know what this street
sweeping does to our gut microbes or whether it alters the meta bolites they
produce. There is good evidence that it removes microbes from the small
intestine, where  normally only a few reside, and sweeps them into the
colon, where most gut microbes  live. In people with an inactive migrating
motor complex, microbes grow more abundantly in the interior of the small
intestine, a condition called small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. This
causes abdominal discomfort, bloating, and altered bowel habits. We don’t
know whether fasting also reduces the abundance of microbes living in the
large intestine, and if the microbes living in close proximity to the lining of
the gut are af fected as well.
Fasting may also reset the many sensory mechanisms in the gut that are
essential for gut-brain communication. These include our main appetite
control mechanisms, which sense satiety . Having no fat in the intestine for
one or more days may enable vagal nerve endings to regain their sensitivity
to appet ite-reducing hormones such as cholecystokinin or leptin, and it may
also return sensitiv ity settings in the hypothalamus to normal levels.
Don’t eat when you are stressed, angry , or sad. To farm your gut
microbes optima lly, feeding is only half the story . We’ve seen that emotions
can have a profo und effect on the gut and the microbial environment in the
form of gut reactions. A nega tive emotional state will throw the gut-
microbiota-brain axis out of balance in several ways. It makes your gut
leakier , it activates your gut-based immune system, and it triggers endocrine
cells in the gut wall to release signaling molecules such as the stress
hormone norepinephrine and serotonin. It can also reduce important
members of your gut microbial communities, in particular lactobacilli and
bifidobacteria. These can profoundly change the behavior of gut microbes.
These behavioral changes are likely to influence the structure of microbial
communities, how the microbes break down food components, and which
metabolites they send back to the brain.
For all these reasons, no matter how conscientious you are when
selecting your food at the Whole Foods market, and no matter how much
you believe in the health benefits of the latest fad diet, feelings of stress,
anger , sadness, or anxiety always turn up at your dinner table. They can not
only ruin the meal; if you eat when you’re feeling bad, it can also be bad for
your gut and bad for your brain.  Think about Frank, who becam e intolerant
to food when worried about not being close enough to a restroom in an
unfamiliar restaurant, or Bill, who couldn’ t stop vomiting when he was
stressed. If you are not mindful of the stress or other negative emotions in
your body, it can lead you into seeking comfort food, even though such
food is unhealthy .
For these reasons, scan your body and mind and tune in to your
emotions before  you sit down to eat something. If you are stress ed, anxious,
or angry , try to avoid adding food to the turmoil in your gut.
In addition, if you have always been an anxious person, or suffer from
an anxiety disorder or depress ion, the influence of these negative mind
states on the activities of your gut microbes when it comes to digesting the
leftovers of your meal is even more pronounced, and it may be difficult to
change the situation even if you are aware of it. In this case, it is prudent to
seek the help of a physician  or psychiatrist to treat such common
conditions.
Enjoy meals together . Just as negative emotions are bad for your gut-
microbe-brain axis, happiness, joy, and a feeling of connectedness are
probably good. If you eat when you’re happy , your brain sends signals to
your gut that you can think of as special ingredients that spice up your meal
and please your microbes. I suspect that happy microbes will in turn
produce a different set of metabolites that benefit your brain. As noted by
the authors of several scientific articles about the Mediterranean diet, some
of the health benefits you get from eating a Mediterranean diet are likely to
come from the close social interactions and lifestyle common in countries
adhering to such a diet. The resulting sense of connectednes s and well-
being almost certainly affects  the gut and influences how your gut
microbiota respond to what you eat.
After scanning your body and becoming aware of how you feel, try to
switch to a positive emotional state and experience the differen ce this shift
has on your overall well-being. Various techniques have been proven
effective at this, including cogn itive behavioral therapy , hypnos is, and self-
relaxation techniques, as well as mindfulness-based stress reduction. You
may see benefits  every time you eat a meal, or you may notice benefits that
occur over time.
Become an Expert in Listening to Your Gut Feelings
Mindfulness-based stress reduction can also help you get in touch with your
gut feelings and reduce the negative biasing influence of thoughts and
memories on these feeling states. This sort of mindfulness helps relieve
disorders of the gut-brain axis.
Mindfulness meditation is typically described as “nonjudgmental
attention to experiences in the present moment.” In order to become more
mindful you will have to master three interrelated skills: learn to focus and
sustain your attention in the present moment, improve your ability to
regulate your emotions, and develop a greater self-awareness. Under normal
circumstances, the majority of bodily signals reaching your brain are not
consciously perceived. A key element of mindfulness meditation is learning
to becom e more aware of these  bodily sensations, including the sensations
associated with deep abdominal breathing, and with the state of your
digestive system. By becoming more aware of these gut feelings, those
associated with good and bad gut reactions, you can better regulate your
own emotions. According to brain-imaging studies, including those
performed by my colleague Kirsten Tillisch, meditation affects key brain
regions that help you pay attention and make value judgment s about the
world around you and about events going on in your body . It also leads to
structural chang es in several brain regions, including those involved with
body awareness, memory , regulation of emotions, and anatomical
connections between the right and left hemisphere.
Keep Your Brain (and Your Gut Microbiota) Fit
Of course, there is unequivocal evidence for the health-promoting effects of
regular exercise, and no recommendations to achieve optimal health could
come without the inclusion of regular physical exercise. Aero bic exercise
has well-documented beneficial effects on brain structure and function,
ranging from a reduction in the age-related decline in thickness of the
cerebral cortex, to improved cognitive function and reduced stress
responsiveness. In view of the close interactions between the brain, the gut,
and its microbes , there is no question in my mind that these brain-related
health benefits of regular exercise are reflected in a positive way in the
health of the gut microbiome.
HOW  AND WHA T TO FEED YOUR GUT  MICROBES
•Aim to maximize gut microbial diversity by maximizing regular
intake of naturally fermented foods and probiotics.
•Reduce the inflammatory potential of your gut microbiota by
making better nutritional choices.
•Cut down on animal fat in your diet.
•Avoid, whenever possible, mass-produced, processed food
and select or ganically grown food.
•Eat smaller servings at meals.
•Be mindful of prenatal nutrition.
•Reduce stress and practice mindfulness.
•Avoid eating when you are stressed, angry , or sad.
•Enjoy the secret pleasures and social aspects of food.
•Become an expert in listening to your gut feelings.
Even though we humans are fascinated by the exploration of the
frontiers in space and in the vastness of the oceans, it seems that until
recently , we completely ignored the complex universe within our own
bodies. While much is still to be learned about the influence of this system
on our health and well-being, the emer ging science is already having a
major influence on our mind and body .
The brain-gut-m icrobiome axis links our brain health closely to what we
eat, how we grow and process our food, what medications we take, how we
come into this world, and how we interact with the microbes in our
environment throughout life. Now that we are beginning to fully  understand
this marvelous complexity of universal connectedness, in which we as
humans represent only a tiny fraction, I am convinced that we will view the
world, ourselves, and our health with very dif ferent eyes.
This new awareness will shift our focus from treating diseases toward
achieving optimal health. It will shift us away from spending billions on
treating cancer with warlike, scorched-earth therapies, on treating obesity
with crippling surgeries of the gastrointestinal tract, and on dealing with the
fallouts from cognitive decline with expensive long-term support measures.
It will shift us away from being passive recipients of an ever-increasing
number of medications to takin g responsibility for the optimal functioning
of our brain-gut  axis by becom ing ecological systems engineers with the
knowledge, power , and motivation to get our gut-microbiota-brain
interactions functioning at peak effectiveness, with the goal of optimal
health.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have benefited from the contribution of many individuals who have made
it possib le to write this book. I am grateful to my patients who over several
decades have taught me with their life stories the importance of mind-brain-
gut interactions for health and disease. To my incredible colleagues and
research team who were essential throughout my career in pursuing the
research on the interactions between the gut, its microbiota, and the brain.
To Paul Bell, Sue Smalley , and Barb Natterson, who encouraged me to
embark on writing this book and whose encouragement helped me to
complete it. To Rob Lemelson and Marco Cavalieri, who with their
incredible generosity provided beautiful physical spaces to start the creative
writing process. To Dan Ferber for invaluable advice and assistance that
helped me to put a wealth of hard science into an easily readable and
entertaining text, and to Sandra Blakesley , Billi Gordon, and Royce Flippin
for their creative  input. To Mark Lyte for help with historical aspects of the
gut-microbiome signaling story . To Marco Cavalieri and Nancee Chaf fee
for practical advice on the topic of the Mediteranean diet. To Catherine
Cowles, my agent, who introduced me to the world of publishing for a wide
audience and to Julie Will, my editor at HarperW ave, who put her faith into
my book proposal from the very beginning and provided me invaluable
editorial advice throughout the process. To Jon Lee, for creating the
illustrations for the book. And last but not least to my wife, Minou, who not
only encouraged me to keep on going during difficult phases of the writing
process, but who was incredibly supportive by putting up with an “absent”
husband during the past year .
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aagaard, Kjersti, Jun Ma, Kathleen M. Antony , Radhika Ganu, Joseph Petrosino, and James
Versalovic. “The Placenta Harbors a Unique Microbiome.” Science Translational Medicine  6 (2014):
237ra65.
Abell, Thomas L., Kathleen A. Adams, Richard. G. Boles, Athos Bousvaros, S. K. F. Chong, David
R. Fleisher , William L. Hasler , et al. “Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome in Adults.” Neur ogastr oenter ology
and Motility  20 (2008): 269–84.
Aksenov , Pavel. “Stanislav Petrovic: The Man Who May Have Saved the World.” BBC News,
September 26, 2013. http://www .bbc.com/news/world-europe-24280831.
Albenber g, Lindsey G., and Gary D. Wu. “Diet and the Intestinal Microbiome : Associations,
Functions, and Implications for Health and Disease.” Gastr oenter ology  146 (2014): 1564–72.
Alcock, Joe, Carlo C. Maley , and C. Athena Aktipis. “Is Eating Behavior Manipulated by the
Gastrointestinal Microbiota? Evolutionary Pressures and Potential Mechanisms.” Bioessays 36
(2014): 940–49.
Allman, John M., Karli K. Watson, Nicole A. Tetreault, and Atiya Y. Hakeem. “Intuition and Autism:
A Possible Role for Von Economo Neurons.” Trends in Cognitive Neur osciences  9 (2005): 367–73.
Almy , Thomas P., and Maurice Tulin. “Alterations in Colonic Function in Man Under Stress. I.
Experimental Production of Changes Simulating the Irritable Colon.” Gastr oenter ology 8 (1947):
616–26.
Aziz, Imra n, Marios Hadjivassiliou, and David S. Sanders. “The Spectrum of Noncoeliac Gluten
Sensitivity .” Natur e Reviews Gastr oenter ology and Hepatology  12 (2015): 516–26.
Baeckhed, Fredrik, Josefine Roswall, Yangqing Peng, Qiang Feng, Huijue Jia, Petia Kovatcheva-
Datchary , Yin Li, et al. “Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome During the First
Year of Life.” Cell Host and Micr obe 17 (2015): 690–703.
Bailey , Michael T., Gabriele R. Lubach, and Christopher L. Coe. “Prenatal Stress Alters Bacterial
Colonization of the Gut in Infant Monkeys.” Journal of Pediatric Gastroenter ology and Nutrition  38
(2004): 414–21.
Bailey , Michael T., Scot E. Dowd, Jeffrey D. Galley , Amy R. Hufnagle, Rebecca G. Allen, and Mark
Lyte. “Exp osure to a Social Stressor Alters the Structure of the Intestinal Microbiota: Implications for
Stressor -Induced Immunomodulation.” Brain, Behavior and Immunity  25 (201 1): 397–407.
Bercik, Premysl, Emmanuel Denou, Josh Collins, Wendy Jackson, Jun Lu, Jennifer Jury, Yikang
Deng, et al. “The Intestinal Microbiota Affect Central Levels of Brain-Derived Neurotropic Factor
and Behavior in Mice.” Gastr oenter ology  141 (201 1): 599–609, 609.e1–3.
Berdoy , Manuel, Joanne P. Webster , and David W. Macdonald. “Fatal Attraction in Rats Infected with
Toxoplasma gondii.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  267 (2000): 1591–94.
Bested, Alison C., Alan C. Logan, and Eva M. Selhub. “Intestinal Microbiota, Probio tics and Mental
Health: From Metchnikof f to Modern Advances: Part II—Contemporary Contextual  Research.” Gut
Pathogens  5 (2013): 3.
Binder , Elisabeth B., and Charles B. Neme roff. “The CRF System, Stress, Depression, and Anxiety:
Insights from Human Genetic Studies.” Molecular Psychiatry  15 (2010): 574–88.
Blaser , Martin. Missing Micr obes. New York: Henry Holt, 2014.
Braak, Heiko, U. Rüb, W. P. Gai, and Kelly Del Tredici. “Idiopathic Parkinson’ s Disease: Possible
Routes by Which Vulnerable Neuronal Types May Be Subject to Neuroinvasion by an Unknown
Pathogen.” Journal of Neural T ransmission (V ienna)  110 (2003): 517–36.
Bravo, Javier A., Paul Forsythe, Marianne V. Chew , Emily Escaravage, Hélène M. Savignac,
Timothy G. Dinan, John Bienenstock, and John F. Cryan. “Ingestion of Lacto bacillus Strain
Regulates Emotional Behavior and Centra l GABA  Receptor Expression in a Mouse via the Vagus
Nerve.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA  108 (201 1): 16050–55.
Bronson, Stephanie L., and Tracy L. Bale. “The Placenta as a Mediator of Stress Effects on
Neurodevelopmental Reprogramming.” Neur opsychopharmacology  41 (2016): 207–18.
Buchsbaum, Monte S., Erin A. Hazlett, Joseph Wu, and William E. Bunney Jr. “Positron Emission
Tomography with Deoxyglucose-F18 Imaging of Sleep.” Neur opsychopharmacology  25, no. 5 Suppl
(2001): S50–S56.
Caldji, Christian, Ian C. Hellstrom, Tie-Yuan Zhang, Josie Diorio, and Michael J. Meaney .
“Environmental Regulation of the Neural Epigenome.” FEBS Letters  585 (201 1): 2049–58.
Cani, Patrice D., and Amandine Everard. “Talking Microbes: When Gut Bacteria Interact with Diet
and Host Or gans.” Molecular Nutrition and Food Resear ch 60 (2016): 58–66.
Champagne, Frances, and Michael J. Meaney . “Like Mother , like Daughter: Evidence for Non-
Genomic Transmission of Parental Behavior and Stress Responsivity .” Progress in Brain Resear ch
133 (2001): 287–302.
Chassaing, Benoit, Jesse D. Aitken, Andrew T. Gewirtz, and Matam Vijay-Kumar . “Gut Microbi ota
Drives Metabolic Disease in Immunologically Altered Mice.” Advances in Immunology  116 (2012):
93–1 12.
Chassaing, Benoit, Omry Koren, Julia K. Goodrich, Angela C. Poole, Shanthi Srinivasan, Ruth E.
Ley, and Andrew T. Gewirtz. “Dietary Emulsifiers Impact the Mouse Gut Microbiota Promoting
Colitis and Metabolic Syndrome.” Natur e 519 (2015): 92–96.
Chu, Hiutu ng, and Sarkis K. Mazmanian. “Innate Immune Recognition of the Micro biota Promotes
Host-Microbial Symbiosis.” Natur e Immunology  14 (2013): 668–75.
Collins, Stephen M., Michael Surette, and Premysl Bercik. “The Interplay Between the Intestinal
Microbiota and the Brain.” Natur e Reviews Micr obiology  10 (2012): 735–42.
Costello, Elizabeth K., Keaton Stagaman, Les Dethlefsen, Brendan J. M. Bohannan, and David A.
Relman. “The Application of Ecologic al Theory Toward an Understanding of the Human
Microbiome.” Science  336 (2012): 1255–62.
Coutinho, Santosh V., Paul M. Plotsky , Marc Sablad, John C. Miller , H. Zhou, Alfred I. Bayati, James
A. McRoberts, and Emeran A. Mayer . “Neonatal Maternal Separation Alters Stress-Induced
Responses to Viscerosomatic Nociceptiv e Stimuli in Rat.” American Journal of Physiology—
Gastr ointestinal and Liver Physiology  282 (2002): G307–16.
Cox, Laura  M., Shingo Yamanashi, Jiho Sohn, Alexander V. Alekseyenko, Jacqueline M. Young,
Ilseung Cho, Sungheon Kim, Hullin Li, Zhan Gao, Douglas Mahana, Jorge G. Zarate Rodriguez,
Arlin B. Rogers, Nicolas Robine, P’ng Loke, and Martin Blaser . Cell 158 (2014): 705–721.
Coyte, Katherine Z., Jonas Schluter , and Kevin R. Foster . “The Ecology of the Microbiome:
Networks, Competition, and Stability .” Science  350 (2015): 663–66.
Craig, A. D. How Do You Feel? An Inter oceptive Moment with Your Neur obiological Self. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
. “How Do You Feel—Now? The Anterior Insula and Human Awareness.” Natur e Reviews
Neur oscience  10 (2009): 59–70.
. “Interoce ption and Emotion: A Neuroan atomical Perspective.” In Handbook of Emotions,
3rd ed. Edited by Michael Lewis, Jeannette M. Haviland-Jones, and Lisa Feldman Barrett, 272–88.
New York: Guilford Press, 2008.
Critchley , Hugo D., Stefan Wiens, Pia Rotshtein, Arne Öhman, and Raymond J. Dolan. “Neural
Systems Supporting Interoceptive Awareness.” Natur e Neur oscience  7 (2004): 189–95.
Cryan, John F., and Timothy G. Dinan. “Mind-Altering Microor ganisms: The Impact of the Gut
Microbiota on Brain and Behaviour .” Natur e Reviews Neur oscience  13 (2012): 701–12.
Damasio, Antonio. Descartes’  Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.  New York: Putnam,
1996.
. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness . New
York: Harcourt Brace, 1999.
Damasio, Antonio, and Gil B. Carvalho. “The Nature of Feelings: Evolutionary and Neurobiological
Origins.” Natur e Reviews Neur oscience  14 (2013): 143–52.
David, Lawrence A., Corinne F. Maurice, Rachel N. Carmody , David B. Gootenber g, Julie E. Button,
Benjamin E. Wolfe, Alisha V. Ling, et al. “Diet Rapidly and Reproducibly Alters the Human Gut
Microbiome.” Natur e 505 (2014): 559–63.
De Lartigue, Guillaume, Claire Barbier de La Serre, and Helen E Raybould. “Vagal Afferent Neurons
in High Gat Diet-Ind uced Obesity: Intestinal Microflora, Gut Inflammation and Cholecystokinin.”
Physiology and Behavior  105 (201 1): 100–105.
De Palma, Giada, Patricia Blennerhassett , J. Lu, Y. Deng, A. J. Park, W. Green, E. Denou, et al.
“Microbiota and Host Determinants of Behavioural Phenotype in Maternally Separated Mice.”
Natur e Communications  6 (2015): 7735.
Diaz-Heijtz, Rochell ys, Shugui Wang, Farhana Anuar , Yu Qian, Britta Björkholm, Annika
Samuelsson, Martin L. Hibberd, Hans Forssber g, and Sven Petterssonc. “Normal Gut Microbiota
Modulates Brain Development and Beha vior.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 108 (201 1): 3047–52.
Dinan, Timothy G., and John F. Cryan. “Melancholic Microbes: A Link Between Gut Microbiota and
Depression?” Neur ogastr oenter ology and Motility  25 (2013): 713–19.
Dinan, Timothy G., Catherine Stanton, and John F. Cryan. “Psychobiotics: A Novel Class of
Psychotropic.” Biological Psychiatry  74 (2013): 720–26.
Dorrestein, Pieter C., Sarkis K. Mazmanian, and Rob Knight. “Finding the Missin g Links Among
Metabolites, Microbes, and the Host.” Immunity  40 (2014): 824–32.
Ernst, Edzard. “Colonic Irrigation and the Theory of Autointoxication: A Triumph of Ignorance over
Science.” Journal of Clinical Gastr oenter ology  24 (1997): 196–98.
Fasano, Alessio, Anna Sapone, Victor Zevallos, and Detlef Schuppan. “Nonceliac Gluten
Sensitivity .” Gastr oenter ology  148 (2015): 1 195–1204.
Flint, Harry J., Karen P. Scott, Petra Louis, and Sylvia H. Duncan. “The Role of the Gut Microbiota
in Nutrition and Health.” Natur e Reviews Gastr oenter ology and Hepatology  9 (2012): 577–89.
Francis, Darlene D., and Michael J. Meaney . “Maternal Care and the Development of the Stress
Response.” Curr ent Opinion in Neur obiology  9 (1999): 128–34.
Furness, John B. “The Enteric Nervous System and Neurogastroenterology .” Natur e Reviews
Gastr oenter ology and Hepatology  9 (2012): 286–94.
Furness, John B., Brid P. Callaghan, Leni R. Rivera, and Hyun-Jung Cho. “The Enteric Nervous
System and Gastrointestinal Innervation : Integrated Local and Central Control.” Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology  817 (2014): 39–71.
Furness, John B., Leni R. Rivera, Hyun-Jung Cho, David M. Bravo, and Brid Callaghan. “The Gut as
a Sensory Or gan.” Natur e Reviews Gastr oenter ology and Hepatology  10 (2013): 729–40.
Gershon, Michael D. “5-Hydroxytryptamine (Serotonin) in the Gastrointestinal Tract.” Curr ent
Opinion in Endocrinology , Diabetes and Obesity  20 (2013): 14–21.
. The Second Brain . New York: HarperCollins, 1998.
Groelund, Minna-Maija, Olli-Pekka Lehtonen, Erkki Eerola, and Pentti Kero. “Fec al Microflora in
Healthy Infants Born by Different Methods of Delivery: Permanent Changes in Intestinal Flora after
Cesarean Delivery .” Journal of Pediatric Gastr oenter ology and Nutrition  28 (1999): 19–25.
Grupe, Dan W., and Jack B. Nitschke. “Uncertainty and Anticipation in Anxiety: An Integrated
Neurobiological and Psychological Perspective.” Natur e Reviews Neur oscience  14 (2013): 488–501.
Gu, Yian, Adam M. Brickman, Yaakov Stern, Christina G. Habeck, Qolamreza R. Razlighi, Jose A.
Luchsinger , Jennifer J. Manly , Nicole Schupf, Richard Mayeux, and Nikolaos Scarmeas.
“Mediterranean Diet and Brain Structure in a Multiethnic Elderly Cohort.” Neur ology  85 (2015):
1744–51.
Hamilton, M. Kristina, Gaëlle Boudry , Danielle G. Lemay , and Helen E. Raybou ld. “Changes in
Intestinal Barrier Function and Gut Microb iota in High-Fat Diet-Fed Rats Are Dynamic and Region
Dependent.” American Journal of Physiology—Gastr ointestinal and Liver Physiology  308 (2015):
G840–51.
Henry J. Kaiser Fami ly Foundation. “Health Care Costs: A Primer . How Much Does the US Spend
on Health Care and How Has It Changed .” May 1, 2012. http://kf f.org/report-sect ion/health-care-
costs-a-primer -2012-report/.
. “Snapshots: Health Care Spending in the United States and Selected OECD Countries.”
April 12, 2011. http://kf f.org/health-costs/issue-brief/snapshots-health-care-spending-in-the-united-
states-selected-oecd-countries/.
Hildebrandt, Marie A., Christian Hoffman,  Scott A. Sherrill-Mix, Sue A. Keilbaugh, Micah Hamady ,
Ying-Y u Chen, Rob Knight, Rexford S. Ahima, Frederic Bushman, and Gary D. Wul. “High-Fat Diet
Determines the Composition of the Murine Gut Microbiome Independently  of Obesity .”
Gastr oenter ology  137 (2009): 1716–24.e1–2.
House, Patrick K., Ajai Vyas, and Robert  Sapolsky . “Predator Cat Odors Activate Sexual Arousal
Pathways in Brains of Toxoplasma gondii Infected Rats.” PLoS One  6 (201 1): e23277.
Hsiao, Elaine Y. “Gastrointestinal Issues in Autism Spectrum Disorder .” Harvar d Review of
Psychiatry 22 (2014): 104–1 1.
Human Microbiome Consortium. “A Framework for Human Microbiome Research.” Natur e 486
(2012): 215–21.
Iwatsuki, Ken, R. Ichikawa, A. Uematsu, A. Kitamura, H. Uneyama, and K. Torii. “Detecting Sweet
and Umami Tastes in the Gastrointestinal Tract.” Acta Physiologica (Oxfor d) 204 (2012): 169–77.
Jaenig, Wilfrid. The Integrative Action of the Autonom ic Nervous System: Neur obiology of
Homeostasis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Jasarevic, Eldin, Ali B. Rodgers, and Tracy L. Bale. “Alterations in the Vaginal Microbiome by
Maternal Stress Are Associated with Metabolic Reprogramming of the Offspring Gut and Brain.”
Endocrinology  156 (2015): 3265–76.
. “A Novel Role for Maternal Stress and Microbial Transmission in Early Life Prog ramming
and Neurodevelopment.” Neur obiology of Str ess 1 (2015): 81–88.
Johnson, Pieter T. J., Jacobus C. de Rood e, and Andy Fenton. “Why Infectious Disease Research
Needs Community Ecology .” Science  349 (2015): 1259504.
Jouanna, Jacques. Hippocrates. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999.
Karamanos, B., A. Thanopoulou, F. Angelico, S. Assaad-Khalil, A. Barbato, M. Del Ben, V.
Dimitrijevic-Sreckovic, et al. “Nutritional Habits in the Mediterranean Basin: The Macronutrient
Composition of Diet and Its Relation with the Traditional Mediterranean Diet: Multi- Centre Study of
the Mediterranean Group for the Study of Diabetes (MGSD).” European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition  56 (2002): 983–91.
Kastorini, Christina-Maria, Haralampos J. Milionis, Katherine Esposito, Dario Giugliano, John A.
Goudevenos, and Demosthenes B. Panagi otakos. “The Effect of Mediterranean Diet on Metabolic
Syndrome and Its Components: A Meta-Analysis of 50 Studies and 534,906 Individu als.” Journal of
the American College of Car diology  57 (201 1): 1299–1313.
Koenig, Jeremy E., Aymé Spor, Nicholas Scalfone, Ashwana D. Fricker , Jesse Stombaugh, Rob
Knight, Largus T. Angenent, and Ruth E. Ley. “Succession of Microbial Consortia in the Developing
Infant Gut Microbiome.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 108 Suppl 1 (2011):
4578–85.
Krol, Kath leen M., Purva Rajhans, Manuela Missana, and Tobias Grossmann. “Duration of Exclusive
Breastfeeding Is Associated with Differences in Infants’  Brain Responses to Emotional Body
Expressions.” Frontiers in Behavioral Neur oscience  8 (2015): 459.
Le Doux, Joseph. The Emoti onal Brain : The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. New
York: Simon & Schuster , 1996.
Ley, Ruth E., Catherine A. Lozupone, Micah Hamady , Rob Knight, and Jeffrey I. Gordon. “Worlds
Within Worlds: Evolution of the Vertebrate Gut Microbiota.” Natur e Reviews Micr obiology  6 (2008):
776–88.
Lizot, Jacques. Tales of the Yanomami: Daily Life in the Venezuelan Forest. Cambridg e: Cambridge
University Press, 1991.
Lopez-Legarrea, Patricia, Nicholas Robert  Fuller , Maria Angeles Zulet, Jose Alfredo Martinez, and
Ian Douglas Caterson. “The Influence of Mediterranean, Carbohydrate and High Protein Diets on
Gut Microbiota Composition in the Treatment of Obesity and Associated Inflammatory State.” Asia
Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition  23 (2014): 360–68.
Lyte, Mark . “The Effect of Stress on Microbial Growth.” Anima: Health Resear ch Reviews  15
(2014): 172–74.
Mawe, Gary M., and Jill M. Hoffman. “Serotonin Signaling in the Gut: Functions, Dysfunctions, and
Therapeutic Targets.” Natur e Reviews Gastr oenter ology and Hepatology  10 (2013): 473–86.
Mayer , Emeran A. “Gut Feelings: The Emer ging Biology of Gut-Brain Communi cation.” Natur e
Reviews Neur oscience 12 (201 1): 453–66.
. “The Neurobiology of Stress and Gastrointestinal Disease.” Gut 47 (2000): 861–69.
Mayer , Emeran A., and Pierre Baldi. “Can Regulatory Peptides Be Regarded as Words of a
Biological Language.” American Journal of Physiology  261 (1991): G171–84.
Mayer , Emeran A., Rob Knight, Sarkis K. Mazmanian, John F. Cryan, and Kirste n Tillisch. “Gut
Microbes and the Brain: Paradigm Shift in Neuroscience .” Journal of Neur oscience  34 (2014):
15490–6.
Mayer , Emeran A., Bruce D. Nalibof f, Lin Chang, and Santosh V. Coutinho. “V. Stress and Irritable
Bowel Syndrome.” American Journal of Physiology—Gastr ointestinal and Liver Physiology  280
(2001): G519–24.
Mayer , Emeran A., Bruce D. Nalibof f, and A. D. Craig. “Neuroimaging of the Brain-Gut Axis: From
Basic Understanding to Treatment of Functional GI disorders.” Gastr oenter ology  131 (2006): 1925–
42.
Mayer , Emeran A., David Padua, and Kirsten Tillisch. “Altered Brain-Gut Axis in Autism:
Comorbidity or Causative Mechanisms?” Bioessays 36 (2014): 933–39.
Mayer , Emeran A., Kirsten Tillisch, and Arpana Gupta. “Gut/Brain Axis and the Microbiota.”
Journal of Clinical Investigation  125 (2015): 926–38.
McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT. “Brain Disorders by the Numbers.” January 16, 2014.
https://mcgovern.mit.edu/brain-disorders/by-the-numbers#AD.
Menon, Vinod, and Luciana Q. Uddin. “Saliency , Switching, Attention and Control: A Network
Model of Insula Function.” Brain Structur e and Function  214 (2010): 655–67.
Mente, Andrew, Lawr ence de Koning, Harry S. Shannon, and Sonia S. Anand.  “A System atic Review
of the Evidence Supporting a Causal Link  Between Dietary Factors and Coronary Heart Disease.”
Archives of Internal Medicine  169 (2009): 659–69.
Moss, Michael. Salt, Sugar , Fat . New York: Random House, 2013.
Pacheco, Alline R., Daniela Barile, Mark A. Underwood, and David A. Mills. “The Impact of the
Milk Glyco biome on the Neonate Gut Microbiota.” Annual Review of Animal Biosciences  3 (2015):
419–45.
Panksepp, Jaak. Affective Neuroscience. The Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions . Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1998.
Pelletier , Amandine, Christine Barul, Catherine Féart, Catherine Helmer , Charlotte Bernard, Olivier
Periot, Bixente Dilharreguy , et al. “Medite rranean Diet and Preserved Brain Structu ral Connectivity
in Older Subjects.” Alzheimer ’s and Dementia  11 (2015): 1023–31.
Pollan, Michael. Food Rules: An Eater ’s Manual . New York: Penguin Books, 2009.
Psaltopoulou, Theod ora, Theodoros N. Sergentanis, Demosthenes B. Panagiotakos, Ioannis N.
Sergentanis, Rena Kosti, and Nikolao s Scarmeas. “Mediterranean Diet, Stroke, Cognitive
Impairment, and Depression: A Meta-Analysis.” Annals of Neur ology  74 (2013): 580–91.
Psichas, Arianna, Frank Reimann, and Fiona M. Gribble. “Gut Chemosensing Mechanisms.” Journal
of Clinical Investigation  125 (2015): 908–17.
Qin, Junjie , Ruiqiang Li, Jeroen Raes, Manimozhiyan Arumugam, Kristof fer Solvsten Burgdorf,
Chaysavanh Manicha nh, Trine Nielsen, et al. “A Human Gut Microbial Gene Catalo gue Established
by Metagenomic Sequencing.” Natur e 464 (2010): 59–65.
Queipo-Ortuno, Maria Isabel, María Boto-Ordóñez, Mora Murri, Juan Miguel Gomez-Zumaquero,
Mercedes Clemente-P ostigo, Ramon Estruch, Fernando Cardona Diaz, Cristina Andrés-Lacueva, and
Francisco J. Tinahones. “Influence of Red Wine Polyphenols and Ethanol on the Gut Microbiota
Ecology and Biochemical Biomarkers.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition  95 (2012): 1323–34.
Raybould, Helen E. “Gut Chemosensing:  Interactions Between Gut Endocrine Cells and Visceral
Afferents.” Autonomic Neur oscience  153 (2010): 41–46.
Relman, David A. “The Human Microbiome and the Future Practice of Medicine.” Journal of the
American Medical Association  314 (2015): 1 127–28.
Rook, Graham A., and Christopher A. Lowry . “The Hygiene Hypothesis and Psychiatric Disorders.”
Trends in Immunology  29 (2008): 150–58.
Rook, Graham A., Charles L. Raison, and Christopher A. Lowry . “Microbiota, Immunoregulatory
Old Friend s and Psychiatric Disorders.” Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology  817
(2014): 319–56.
Roth, Jesse, Derek LeRoith, E. S. Collier , N. R. Weaver , A. Watkinson, C. F. Cleland, and S. M.
Glick. “Evolutionary Origins of Neuropeptides, Hormones, and Receptors: Possible Applications to
Immunology .” Journal of Immunology  135 Suppl (1985): 816s–819s.
Roth, Jesse, Derek LeRoith, Joseph Shiloach, James L. Rosenzweig, Maxine A. Lesniak, and Jana
Havrankova. “The Evolutionary Origins of Hormones, Neurotransmitters, and Other Extracellular
Chemical Messengers : Implications for Mammalian Biology .” New England Journal of Medicine 306
(1982): 523–27.
Rutkow , Ira M. “Beaumont and St. Martin: A Blast from the Past.” Archives of Surgery 133 (1998):
1259.
Sanchez, M. Mar, Charlotte O. Ladd, and Paul M. Plotsky . “Early Adverse Experience as a
Developmental Risk Factor for Later Psych opathology: Evidence from Rodent and Primate Models.”
Development and Psychopathology 13 (2001): 419–49.
Sapolsky , Robert. “Bugs in the Brain.” Scientific American,  March 2003, 94.
Scheperjans, Filip, Velma Aho, Pedro A. B. Pereira, Kaisa Koskinen, Lars Paulin, Eero Pekkonen,
Elena Haapaniemi, et al. “Gut Microbiota Are Related to Parkinson’ s Disease and Clinical
Phenotype.” Movement Disor ders 30 (2015): 350–58.
Schnorr , Stephanie L., Marco Candela, Simone Rampelli, Manuela Centanni, Clarissa Consolandi,
Giulia Basaglia, Silvia Turroni, et al. “Gut Microbiome of the Hadza Hunter -Gatherers.” Natur e
Communications  5 (2014): 3654.
Schulze, Matthias B., Kurt Hoffmann, JoAnn E. Manson, Walter C. Willett, James B. Meigs,
Cornelia Weikert, Christin Heidemann, Graham A. Colditz, and Frank B. Hu. “Dietary Pattern,
Inflammation, and Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes in Women.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
82 (2005): 675–84; quiz 714–15.
Seeley , William W., Vinod Menon, Alan F. Schatzber g, Jennifer Keller , Gary H. Glover , Heather
Kenna, Allan L. Reiss, and Michael D. Greicius. “Dissociable Intrinsic Connectivity Networks for
Salience Processing and Executive Control.” Journal of Neur oscience  27 (2007): 2349–56.
Sender , Ron, Shai Fuchs, and Ron Milo. “Are We Really Vastly Outnumbered? Revisiting the Ratio
of Bacterial to Host Cells in Humans.” Cell 164 (2016): 337–340.
Shannon, Kathleen M., Ali Keshavarzia n, Hemraj B. Dodiya, Shriram Jakate, and Jeffrey H.
Kordower . “Is Alpha-Synuclein in the Colon a Biomarker for Premotor Parkin son’s Disease?
Evidence from 3 Cases.” Movement Disor ders 27 (2012): 716–19.
Spiller , Robin, and Klara Garsed. “Postinfectious Irritable Bowel Syndrome.” Gastr oenter ology  136
(2009): 1979–88.
Stengel, Andreas, and Yvette Taché. “Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Signalin g and Visceral
Response to Stress.” Experimental Biology and Medicine (Maywood)  235 (2010): 1 168–78.
Sternini, Catia, Laura Anselmi, and Enrique Rozengurt. “Enteroendocrine Cells: A Site of ‘Taste’ in
Gastrointestinal Chemosensing.” Curr ent Opinion in Endocrinology , Diabetes and Obesity  15
(2008): 73–78.
Stilling, Roman M., Seth R. Bordenstein, Timothy G. Dinan, and John F. Cryan. “Frie nds with Social
Benefits: Host-Microbe Interactions as a Driver of Brain Evolution and Developmen t?” Frontiers in
Cellular and Infection Micr obiology  4 (2014): 147.
Sudo, Nobuyuki, Yoichi Chida, Yuji Aiba , Junko Sonoda, Naomi Oyama, Xiao-Ni an Yu, Chiharu
Kubo, and Yasuhiro Koga. “Postnatal Microbial Colonization Programs the Hypotha lamic-Pituitary-
Adrenal System for Stress Response in Mice.” Journal of Physiology  558 (2004): 263–75.
Suez, Jotha m, Tal Korem, David Zeevi, Gili Zilberman-Schapira, Christoph A. Thaiss, Ori Maza,
David Israeli, et al. “Artificial Sweeteners Induce Glucose Intolerance by Altering the Gut
Microbiota.” Natur e 514 (2014): 181–86.
Taché, Yvette. “Corticotrophin-Releasing Factor 1 Activation in the Central Amygdale and Visceral
Hyperalgesia.” Neur ogastr oenter ology and Motility  27 (2015): 1–6.
Thaler , Joshua P., Chun-Xia Yi, Ellen A. Schur , Stephan J. Guyenet, Bang H. Hwang, Marcelo O.
Dietrich, Xiaolin Zhao, et al. “Obesity Is Associated with Hypothalamic Injury in Rodents and
Humans.” Journal of Clinical Investigation  122 (2012): 153–62.
Tillisch, Kirsten, Jennifer Labus, Lisa Kilpatrick, Zhiguo Jiang, Jean Stains, Bahar Ebrat, Denis
Guyonnet, Sophie Legrain-Raspaud, Beatrice Trotin, Bruce Nalibof f, and Emeran A. Mayer .
“Consumption of Fermented Milk Product with Probiotic Modulates Brain Activity .”
Gastr oenter ology  144 (2013): 1394–401, 1401.e1–4.
Tomiyama, A. Janet, Mary F. Dallman, Ph.D., and Elissa S. Epel. “Comfort Food Is Comforting to
Those Most Stressed: Evidence of the Chronic Stress Response Network in High Stress Women.”
Psychoneur oendocrinology  36 (201 1): 1513–19.
Truelove, Sidney C. “Movements of the Lar ge Intestine.” Physiological Reviews  46 (1966): 457–512.
Trust for America’ s Health Foundation and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. “Obesity Rates and
Trends: Adult Obesity in the US.” http://state ofobesity .org/rates/(accessed September 2015)
Ursell, Luke K., Henry J. Haiser , Will Van Treuren, Neha Garg, Lavanya Reddivari, Jairam
Vanamala, Pieter C. Dorrestein, Peter J. Turnbaugh, and Rob Knight. “The Intestin al Metabolome:
An Intersection Between Microbiota and Host.” Gastr oenter ology  146 (2014): 1470–76.
Vals-Pedret, Cinta, Aleix Sala-V ila, DPharm, Mercè Serra-Mir , Dolores Corella, DPharm, Rafael de
la Torre, Miguel Ángel Martínez-González, Elena H. Martínez-Lapiscina, et al. “Mediterranean Diet
and Age-Related Cognitive Decline: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” Journal of the American Medical
Association Internal Medicine  175 (2015): 1094–1 103.
Van Oudenhove, Lukas, Shane McKie, Daniel Lassman, Bilal Uddin, Peter Paine, Steven Coen,
Lloyd Gregory , Jan Tack, and Qasim Aziz. “Fatty Acid–Induced Gut-Brain Signaling Attenuates
Neural and Behavior al Effects of Sad Emotion in Humans.” Journal of Clinical Investigation  121
(2011): 3094–99.
Volkow , Nora D., Gene-Jack Wangc, Dardo Tomasib, and Ruben D. Balera. “The Addictive
Dimensionality of Obesity .” Biological Psychiatry  73 (2013): 81 1–18.
Walsh, John H. “Gastrin (First of Two Parts).” New England Journal of Medicine  292 (1975): 1324–
34.
. “Peptides as Regulators of Gastric Acid Secretion.” Annual Review of Physiology  50 (1998):
41–63.
Weltens, N., D. Zhao, and Lukas Van Oudenhove. “Where is the Comfort in Comfort Foods?
Mechanisms Linking Fat Signaling, Reward, and Emotion.” Neur ogastr oenter ology and Motility  26
(2014): 303–15.
Wu, Gary D., Jun Chen, Christian Hoffmann, Kyle Bittinger , Ying-Y u Chen, Sue A. Keilbaugh,
Meenakshi Bewtra, et al. “Linking Long- Term Dietary Patterns with Gut Microbial Enterotypes.”
Science  334 (201 1): 105–8.
Wu, Gary D., Charle ne Compher , Eric Z. Chen, Sarah A. Smith, Rachana D. Shah, Kyle Bittinger ,
Christel Chehoud, et al. “Comparative Metabolomics in Vegans and Omnivores Reveal Constraints
on Diet-Dependent Gut Microbiota Metabolite Production.” Gut 65 (2016): 63–72.
Yano, Jessica M., Kristie Yu, Gregory P. Donaldson, Gauri G. Shastri, Phoebe Ann, Liang Ma,
Cathryn R. Nagler , Rustem F. Ismagilov , Sarkis K. Mazmanian, and Elaine Y. Hsiao. “Indigenous
Bacteria from the Gut Microbiota Regulate Host Serotonin Biosynthesis.” Cell 161 (2015): 264–76.
Yatsunenko, Tanya, Federico E. Rey, Mark J. Manary , Indi Trehan, Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello,
Monica Contreras, Magda Magris, et al. “Human Gut Microbiome Viewed Across Age and
Geography .” Natur e 486 (2012): 222–27.
Zeevi, David, Tal Korem, Niv Zmora, David Israeli, Daphna Rothschild, Adina Weinber ger, Orly
Ben-Y acov, et al. “Personalized Nutrition by Prediction of Glycemic Responses.” Cell 163 (2015 ):
1079–94.
INDEX
The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created. To
locate a specific entry , please use your e-book reader ’s search tools.
Page numbers of illustrations appear in italics.
abdominal pain, 109, 131, 134, 155
adipokines, 225
adrenal glands, 34, 47
adrenaline (epinephrine), 42
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study , 110
affective neuroscience, 45
“albatross syndrome,” 67
Alcock, Joe, 236
allergies, 8, 84
allostatic load, 263–64
Almy , Thomas, 41
alpha-synuclein, 250
Alzheimer ’s disease, 8, 16, 23, 100, 222, 225, 240, 260, 272, 273
American Gut Project, 155–56
amino acids, 69, 127, 21 1, 213, 214, 218
amygdala, 47, 159, 187
anger , 40, 42, 43, 45, 48, 50, 64, 77, 87, 161, 180, 210, 270, 281
antianxiety drugs, 50, 141, 146
antibiotics, 5–6, 22, 94, 132, 140–41, 244
diarrhea and, 16, 19–20, 96, 138, 139
gut microbes and, 138–41, 155, 266, 267, 267
antidepressants, 109, 134, 147
SSRIs, 12, 23, 134, 146
anxiety , 8, 16, 35, 47, 77, 81, 82, 85, 89, 101, 1 13, 127, 131, 133, 146, 260, 281–82
ACE and, 108, 109, 1 11
gut and, 43, 138–39, 141
probiotics to reduce, 145
therapies for , 134, 139, 145–46
appetite, 70, 71, 228–30, 233
-suppressing hormones, 227
“Are Gut Peptides the Words of a Universal Biological Language” (Mayer and Baldi), 78–79
arthritis, 68, 83
artificial sweeteners, 60, 219, 241–43, 245, 248, 271, 276, 278
asthma, 8, 16, 1 10
autism spectrum disorders (ASD), 8, 16, 89, 127, 132, 155–60, 273, 279
fecal microbial transplant, 157–58
gastrointestinal symptoms, 155, 156
gut-brain communications, 180
gut microbiota, 22, 155–59
incidence of, 22
industrial agriculture and, 240
serotonin and, 156
treatment plan, example, 158
VENs and, 180
autoimmune disorders, 8, 22, 268
Ayurvedic therapies, 83
Bacteroides, 157, 203, 243, 270
Bacteroidetes, 156, 203, 237, 270
Baldi, Pierre, 78
Bale, Tracy, 126
Beaumont, William, 39–40
belching, 54
Bercik, Premysl, 124–25, 140, 142
Berdoy , Manuel, 85
bifidobacteria, 126, 129–30, 134, 142, 143, 147, 158, 205, 281
bile acids, 95, 100, 212
Blaser , Martin, 18, 238
bloating, 32, 53, 54, 1 17, 151, 155, 247, 263, 280
blood sugar , 71, 229, 273
Blumstein, Daniel, 265
Bologna, Italy , 203
bowel movements, 37, 52, 54, 69, 80, 109, 135, 138, 139, 151, 159, 249
brain (nervous system), 4, 6, 9, 93, 147. See also brain-gut communications
aging and, 8, 284
appetite control system and, 235
common diseases and
diet and, 219
disorders of, 16, 68, 96, 127
dopamine reward system, 233–34, 237
dreaming, 187
early life and, 130–32, 209, 271–72
emotional memories, 89
emotions and, 24, 29–30, 30, 38–39, 41–46, 101, 160, 162
executive control system, 233
exercise and health of, 283–84
glial cells, 228–29
gut-feelings, 13–14, 161, 170, 173
gut microbial diversity and disorders, 16
gut microbiota signaling, 64, 72, 73, 99–103, 138–40, 141, 144–45
gut peptides (gut hormones) and, 77
gut’s emotional responses and, 44–46
hidden island (insular cortex), 161, 171, 172, 174, 178
high animal fat diet and, 225–29, 232, 275, 279
inflammation and disorders, 26
“interoceptive” information, 65, 160, 169, 171–72, 173–74, 175
Mediterranean diet and, 255–56
metabolic toxemia and, 264
microbe-speak and, 90
microbiome and mental health, 21–24
nerves connecting to the gut, 12
North American diet and, 249–52
prefrontal cortex, 178, 187
pregnancy and, 279
salience system, 1 18, 130, 134, 169–71, 175
satiation and, 62, 175, 226–27
sensory information and, 64–65
somatic markers and, 181
stress and, 6, 1 13, 131
uniquely human, 178–80
VENs and, 178–80
visual cortex, 187
brain-gut communications, 4, 13, 13, 29–50, 56, 101–3, 167, 153
brain-gut disorders, 16, 32–36. See also specific disor ders
brain-gut-microbiome axis, 102, 285
adaptability of, 218
allostatic load and, 263–64
communication within, 102
diet and, 222, 223–25, 233–41, 248
early life and, 132, 267, 271–72
fasting and, 280
food additives and, 245
health and, 259–60
most vulnerable periods, 271
negative emotional states and, 280–82
during sleep, 187–88
Brain Initiative, 15
breast milk, 175, 177, 205–1 1, 278
human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) in, 207–8, 21 1
Brillat-Savarin, Jean Anthelme, 24
Burkina Faso, 203
butyrate, 100, 219
cancer , 5–6, 204, 215, 222, 255, 275
candida yeast infections, 84
Cannon, Walter, 159–60
Cavalieri, Marco and Antonella, 252–54, 255, 256–57
Celexa, 109, 1 11, 135
celiac disease, 246, 248, 276
Center for Ulcer Research and Education (CURE), 75–76, 78, 167
childhood and adverse life events, 107–36
intergenerational transmission of, 1 19–22
medical history and, 108–1 1
mother ’s stress, 1 14–15, 131–32, 133
negative adult health outcomes, 1 10
neuroimaging of the brain and, 1 18
poverty and chronic stress, 1 10
stress ef fects, 1 11–16, 123–27, 130–33
vaginal  vs. cesarean delivery and, 129–30, 131
Chinese medicine, 60–61
cholecystokinin, 227, 230, 280
chronic fatigue syndrome, 263
cisplatin, 69
“clean gut” therapies, 84
Clostridium difficile , 20, 129
Coe, Chris, 126
cognitive behavioral therapy , 50, 123, 134, 155, 159, 282
colon, 20, 35, 37, 39, 49, 55, 70, 72
ancient beliefs and, 82–84
anger and, 64
intestinal putrefaction or autointoxication, 83
metabolizing of food in, 218–19
mind-gut connections and, 41
periodic fasting and, 280
colon cancer , 215
colonic transit study , 81
comfort foods, 230–32, 237, 264
constipation, 138, 155
adverse early life events and, 1 12
chronic, 32, 80–82, 1 12, 274
enemas and, 83
Parkinson’ s disease and, 249–50
treatment, 158
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), 33–35, 34, 47, 48–50, 86, 1 15, 1 17
cortisol, 34, 42, 47, 1 14, 149, 231
Craig, Bud, 160, 169, 171, 172
cravings, 55, 233–37
Crohn’ s disease, 20
Cryan, John F ., 146–47
cyclical vomiting syndrome, 32–36, 48–50, 153
cytokines, 62, 91, 99–100, 102, 147, 225, 228
Damasio, Antonio, 160–61
decision-making, 165–92
author and dream analysis, 189–90
author and intuitive, 165–67
example, Stanislov Petrov , 167–68
gut feelings and, 168–73, 175–77, 183–85, 272
how we decide, 185–86
VENs and, 178–80
women’ s intuition, 182–83
your personal Google and, 181–82
defensins, 152
dendritic cells, 62, 97–98
depression, 8, 23–24, 68, 80, 81, 82, 89, 99, 1 13, 127, 131, 133, 146, 222, 260
ACE and, 108, 109, 1 11
catastrophizing and, 184
diet and, 24, 225, 255
food cravings and, 237
gut microbiota and, 23–24, 146–48
gut response to, 31, 43, 101
new therapies for , 134
Descartes’  Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain (Damasio), 160
detoxification, 15, 83, 95
Devroede, Ghislain, 1 12
diabetes, 9, 242
diarrhea, 35, 46, 67, 124, 109, 1 17, 124, 170, 246
antibiotics and, 16, 19–20, 96, 138, 139
bacterial or viral infection, 70
food poisoning or toxins, 63, 69, 92
traveler ’s diarrhea, 151, 152
diet and nutrition, 22, 24, 195–220
altering gut microbiota and, 21 1–17
animal fat and disease, 222
animal products, 224–25
ASD and, 158
best diet choices, 197
changes in, 94
comfort foods, 230–32, 237, 264
country of origin of food, 276–77
digestion of food and, 72
early life and, 205–1 1
fat and sugar intake, 55, 222
feelings, emotions, and, 25
food addiction, 222, 233–37
food additives, 241–49
GMOs, 277
gut-brain communications and, 217–20
gut metabolites and, 218
gut microbiota and, 24–26, 21 1–20
high fat diet, 60, 99, 212, 222, 225–37, 249–52, 264
high-fructose corn syrup, 242
How and What to Feed Your Gut Microbes (list), 284
how much you eat, control of, 233–37
of hunter -gathers, 196–204, 214–15, 223
industrial agriculture, 237–41, 276–77
Mediterranean diet, 222, 252–58, 282
natural and or ganic foods, 274–75
negative emotional states and, 280–82
North American diet, 197, 202–5, 221–52
omnivore diet, 224
pesticides and chemicals, 277
plant-based diet, 219, 251
portion size, 279
processed foods, 224, 225, 241–49, 276–77, 279
reducing animal fat, 275
serotonin and, 69–70
short-chain fatty acids and, 100, 208, 213, 215, 218, 219, 243
targeting the gut microbiome, 272–82
vegetarian/vegan, 204, 213–14, 251
wheat aller gy, 246–47
digestive system. See gut
disease-causing microbes, 86–87
DNA, 120
Dominguez-Bello, Maria Gloria, 198, 202
dopamine, 47, 153, 233–34, 237
dopaminer gic reward pathway , 233–34
Drama of the Gifted Child, The (Miller), 107–8
dreams, 186–90
Ebers Papyrus, 82
E. coli , 69, 124, 152, 228
Elavil, 134, 135
emotional intelligence, 173–74
emotional operating programs, 45–48, 49
emotions, 137–63
comfort foods and, 230–32
digestion and, 38–39
ENS and, 93
experiments on mice and, 148–49
fat and sugar intake and, 222
felt in the gut, 10, 13, 13, 31–32, 39–41, 64, 107–36, 162, 272
genetics and, 161
gut microbiota and, 21, 137–63
gut mirroring of, 30, 30–31, 50, 88, 1 11
happiness and gut microbiome, 282
how the brain programs the gut’ s emotional responses, 44–46
hunger as proto-emotion, 175
James-Lange theory , 159
negative, and eating, 280–82
new theory of, 159–63
positive, ef fect on gut microbiota, 153
probiotics and, 143–45
recognizing on faces, 29–30, 30, 144
serotonin and, 24, 70–71
somatic marker hypothesis, 160–61
stored memories and, 89, 173
unhealthy memories and the gut, 107–36
endocrine cells, 92
endorphins, 47, 78, 153
enemas and colonics, 80, 82–84
enteric nervous system (ENS), 1 1, 38, 56, 61, 64, 77, 93
communication with the brain, 57
emotions, brain, gut, and, 41–43
food poisoning and, 69
information about food and, 63–64
managing digestion, 88, 101
microbe-speak and, 90
Parkinson’ s disease and, 250–51
as the “second brain,” 1 1, 38
serotonin and, 69
enterochromaf fin cells, 100–101
epigenetics, 120–21, 130, 133, 161
epilepsy , 68
Erickson, Milton, 190
Erspamer , Vittorio, 76, 78
esophagus, 37, 38, 54, 55, 63, 72, 92, 280
fasting, 279–80
fatigue, 80, 81, 99
fear, 42, 45, 47, 49, 50, 77, 84, 86, 138, 179, 182, 210. See also anxiety
fecal microbial transplantation, 20, 22, 26, 156, 157
fermented foods, 135, 139, 142, 201, 277–78
Fermo, Italy , 252–54, 256–57
fiber, dietary , 81, 95
fibromyalgia, 263
Firmicutes, 99, 156, 203, 228, 237, 270
food addiction, 222, 233–37
food additives, 56, 241, 274, 276
artificial sweeteners, 241–43
emulsifiers, 244–45
“vital gluten,” 245–49
food aller gies, 246–47, 276
food emulsifiers, 244–45
food poisoning, 53, 68–69
Food Rules (Pollan), 276
food sensitivities, 84
Foster , Kevin, 274
Freud, Sigmund, 176, 189
gallbladder , 37, 76, 280
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 1 15, 141–42, 177, 21 1
gastrin, 77
gastroenteritis, 53, 150–51, 152
Gershon, Michael, 38, 57, 70
Gewirtz, Andrew , 229, 244
ghrelin, 60, 62, 176, 227, 234
globus sensation, 54
glucagon-like peptide, 227, 234
glucose intolerance, 242
gluten, 245–49
nonceliac gluten sensitivity , 248
Gordon, Jef frey, 202
Grossman, Morton I., 75
Grossmann, Tobias, 210
growth hormone, 1 14
Guahibos people, 202–4
gut (digestive system), 9, 1 1–14
aberrant reactions, 32–36
blood flow to, 101
brain-gut-microbiota dialogue, 147
chronic anger or anxiety and, 43
as complex sensory or gan, 63–65, 88, 249
decision-making and, 10, 1 1
emotions, the brain, ENS and, 41–43
emotions and, 10, 30, 30–31, 50, 64, 88, 101, 1 11
endocrine cells in, 12, 61–62, 92
ENS and, 1 1
evolution of, 196
feelings/sensations and, 13, 13, 31–32, 39–41 ( see also gut feelings; gut reactions)
food’ s nutritional content and absorption, 72
how it works (function), 36–39
how the brain programs the gut’ s emotional responses, 44–46
hypersensitivity of, 55–56, 191
immune system and, 1 1, 15, 62, 264, 272
lining or mucus of, 12, 21, 35, 37, 61, 62, 72, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 152, 219, 244, 246, 251, 280
nasal olfactory receptors in, 61
nerves connecting to the brain, 12
pain sensitivity and, 10
phytochemical receptors in, 59
“predisease” state, 262–63, 264
sensations of, not perceived, 51–53, 56, 71, 171
sensitivity of, 10
sensory network of, 55, 65
serotonin storage in, 12, 70, 272
size of, 12, 65
stress and, 46–48
stress-related disorders and, 131
supercomputer view of, 10–14
taste receptors in, 58–61
gut-brain axis, 10, 13, 14, 58, 72, 87, 93, 162
anatomical connections, 1 1
in children, 175
disorders of, 48
gut microbiota and, 87, 88–90
high-fat diet and, 226–27
hyperactive, 39
hyperresponsiveness, 131
imbalance of (dysbiosis), 19–20
malfunctioning, 80, 81
plant-based diet and, 219
serotonin and, 12, 24
stress and, 122–23, 127, 133
as supercomputer , 73
yin and yang and, 14
gut-brain communications, 1 1, 13, 13, 26–27, 29, 51–73
altered, in ASD, 180
baby’ s, diet and, 206–1 1
corrupted signals, 54–56, 81
CURE and, 75
diet and, 217–20
endocrine cells and, 61–62
food as information, 71–73
“gut-based caucus,” 272
gut microbiota and, 20–21, 88–90
gut sensory system and, 71
hypersensitivity to gut sensations, 55
information highway for , 65–68
life experiences and, 107–36
microbe-speak and, 89–93, 95–103
periodic fasting and, 280
sensory neurons and, 61
serotonin’ s role, 68–71
short-chain fatty acids and, 215, 219
vagus nerve and, 56, 61, 62, 65–68
what the gut reports, 56–57
gut feelings, 13, 14, 76, 160, 161, 162, 170. See also  intuition
accessing through dreams, 186–90
accuracy of, 183–85
advertising and, 183–84
in animals, 180–81
author ’s career choice, 165–67
awareness, 173–74, 190–91, 282–83
brain’ s salience system and, 169–7 1
decision-making and, 165–92, 272
early development of, 175–77
Ericksonian hypnosis and, 190
example, Stanislov Petrov , 167–68
gut microbiota and, 177
somatic markers and, 181
stored in the brain, 13–14, 161, 173
VENs and, 179–80
what a gut feeling is, 168–73
gut microbiome, 4, 15, 16, 18–19, 93, 162, 267
as adaptable, 217–20
breast milk and, 177
eating smaller portions and, 279
emotions and, 163
enjoying meals and, 282
fermented foods/probiotics for , 277–78
as “friendly park ranger ,” 27
high animal fat diet and, 275
How and What to Feed Your Gut Microbes (list), 284
internal ecosystem synchronized with the outer world, 59
keeping healthy , 265–71, 267
mass-produced foods and, 277–78
maximizing gut microbial diversity , 275–76
metabolome of, 219
natural and or ganic foods for , 274–77
negative emotional state and, 280–82
optimal health of, 272–85
periodic fasting and, 279–80
philosophical questions about, 18
pregnancy and, 278–79
stress and, 123–25, 279
targeting for improved health, 272–82
what it encompasses, 16
gut microbiota (bacteria), 4, 1 1–12, 14, 17, 23, 60, 75–103, 140–41, 153
about, 93–94
aging and, 271, 272, 277
antianxiety ef fects, 140–46
antibiotics and, 138–41, 155, 266, 267, 267
appetite and, 228–30
artificial sweeteners and, 243
ASD and, 155–59
benefits derived from, 15–16
breast milk and, 177, 205–1 1
case histories, 79–82, 138–40
childbirth and, 126–27, 128–29
combined human and microbial genes, 17
communication with the brain, 64, 72, 73, 138–40, 141, 144–45, 147, 177
depression and, 23–24, 146–48
detoxification and, 95
diet and, 24–26, 125, 21 1–20, 264
diseases linked to, 20–24, 96
diversity and brain disorders, 16
diversity of, 16, 17, 19–20, 81, 100, 129, 139, 153, 196–97, 203, 206, 207, 208, 219, 224, 225,
265, 272, 274, 284
diversity of, aging and, 251
diversity of, healthy gut and, 267–69
diversity of, hunter -gathers, 200, 204, 205
diversity of, maximizing, 275–78
in early life, 175, 177, 180, 198, 205, 206, 207, 208, 268, 269, 273, 278
early life enemas and, 81
emotions and, 21, 137–63
evolution and, 17–18
exercise and, 283–84
extra calories provided by , 95
food addiction and, 236–37
food additives and, 245, 274
food and feelings, 73, 101–3
functions of, 25–26, 95
genetics and, 266
gut feelings and, 177
happiness and, 153, 282
harmful (pathobionts), 94
high-fat diet and, 99, 212, 228–29, 264
How and What to Feed Your Gut Microbes (list), 284
identifying, 102
immune system and, 15, 94, 96–100, 228–29
“keystone species,” 216
lifestyle modification and, 271
mental health and, 16, 22–24
metabolites of, 24, 25–26, 60, 70, 89, 95, 100, 144–45, 154, 156, 163, 177, 214, 218, 219, 270,
278, 279, 282
microbe-speak, 89–93, 95–102
microbial genes, 100, 163
norepinephrine and pathogens, 150
North American diet and, 202–5, 241–49
novel therapies and, 273–74
number of, 14
obesity and, 96, 229
positive mind-based interventions and, 44
role of, outside of digestion, 102–3
sleep and, 187–88
social behavior and, 21, 154–59
stability and resilience of, 269–71, 272, 273, 275
stored emotional memories and, 89
stress and, 34, 101, 123–26, 127, 148–53, 155, 266
symbionts or commensals, 94
symbiotic relationship of, 94–95
unhealthy gut reactions and, 270
gut peptides (gut hormones), 76–77, 91, 94–95, 102
gut reactions, 13, 13–14, 39–41, 160, 161, 270, 272
Hazda people, 203, 223, 257
heartburn, 6, 32, 36, 53, 263
heart disease, 9, 26, 131, 204, 222, 255
herbs, 58–59, 60, 279
herbal laxatives, 81, 158
hippocampus, 187
Hippocrates, 83
hologenome, 17
hormones, 13, 91, 94. See also specific hormones
appetite-suppressing, 234
How Do Y ou Feel? An Inter oceptive Moment with Y our Neur obiological Self (Craig), 169
Hsiao, Elaine, 157
Human Microbiome Project, 15
hunger , 53, 71, 77, 161, 233, 272
bitter taste receptors and, 60
ghrelin and appetite, 60, 62, 176, 227
gut feelings, intuition, and, 175–77
gut microbiota and appetite, 228–30
hypertension, 4, 6, 199, 204, 249, 263
hypnosis, 44, 50, 123, 134, 135, 190, 282
hypothalamus, 33, 47, 159, 226–28, 229
appetite control, 227–28, 233, 234
periodic fasting and, 280
immune system
in the gut, 1 1, 15, 62, 264, 272
gut microbes and, 15, 94, 96–100, 228–29
high-fat diet and, 226, 228
indigestion, 24, 32, 59
industrial agriculture, 237–41, 276–77
glyphosate (“Roundup”), 240
infections, 3, 5, 46, 84, 125, 126, 138, 157, 204, 206, 208
gastrointestinal, 59, 70, 72, 99, 124, 150, 151, 152–53, 225, 239, 251, 266, 267, 267, 268
inflammation, 26, 57, 94, 98
artificial sweeteners and, 243
cytokines and, 99
food emulsifiers and, 244
high-fat diet and, 222, 225, 226, 227, 228, 264
“metabolic endotoxemia,” 225, 229
during pregnancy , 279
stress and, 264
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 8, 16, 96, 215
information theory , 79
insulin, 60, 78, 229, 234
integrative therapy , 135
intuition, 168, 175–80, 182–83. See also  gut feelings
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 8, 20, 32, 36, 54, 70, 88, 127, 138, 191, 260, 263
early life stress and, 1 15, 1 16–19, 133
emotions and, 41
epigenetics and, 121
gut microbiota and, 156
hypnosis or meditation and, 44
new therapies for , 134–35
stress and, 131, 153
James, William, 159
Jung, Carl Gustav , 188–89
Kahneman, Daniel, 165
Keys, Ancel, 255
“keystone species,” 216
Klonopin, 50, 139, 141
lactobacilli, 124, 126, 129, 134, 142–43, 147, 149, 158, 177, 205, 281
Lange, Carl, 159
large intestine, 25, 37, 100, 101
laxatives, herbal, 81, 158
leaky gut, 96, 98, 100, 152, 228, 236, 264
Leeuwenhoek, Antonie van, 14
leptin, 230, 234, 280
LeRoith, Derek, 78, 90
Levy , Rona, 121
Lexapro, 147
Ley, Ruth, 205
lifestyles, 22, 24, 271
limbic system, 44
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 98, 228, 244
longevity , 261
Malawian people, 197, 202–4
Mazmanian, Sarkis, 157
Meaney , Michael, 1 13–14, 1 19, 120
medicine, 6–9
disease model, 5
machine model, 3, 5–8, 10, 27
U.S. rankings, 7–8
meditation, 44, 123
Mediterranean diet, 222, 252–58, 282
melancholic micr obes, 146
metabolic disorders, 22
metabolic syndrome, 131, 204, 207, 229, 242, 244, 255
metabolic toxemia, 99, 225, 229, 236, 244, 264
methyl groups, 120, 130
microbes, 17, 90–91, 92, 94, 177. See also gut microbiota
microbe-speak, 89–103
Microbiome Initiative, 15
microglial cells, 99–100
migraine headache, 35, 80
migrating motor complex, 37–38
Miller , Geor ge, 66–67
mindfulness-based stress reduction, 134, 139, 282–83
Missing Micr obes, The (Blaser), 18, 238
Montegior gio, Italy , 255
mood, 12, 67, 70, 71, 134, 138, 143, 145, 146, 147, 183, 213, 221, 232, 237, 251. See also emotions
mucins, 98
Mutt, Viktor, 77, 78
nausea, 13, 46, 53, 67, 151, 161, 170, 179
Nemerof f, Charles, 1 12
neurodegenerative disorders, 8, 22, 26. See also  Alzheimer ’s disease; Parkinson’ s disease
neurotransmitters, 79, 89, 90, 91, 102, 1 15, 140, 141–42, 145, 219, 250
noradrenaline, 78
norepinephrine, 34, 124, 148, 150, 281
nucleus accumbens, 234
Obama, Barack, 15
obesity , 8–9, 53, 68, 95, 132, 225
appetite regulation and, 227, 230
artificial sweeteners and, 242
baby’ s diet and, 207
comfort foods, stress, and, 231
diet and, 204
environmental triggers and eating behavior , 236
fat and sugar intake, 222, 235
food addiction and, 235
food additives and, 244
gut microbes and, 96, 229
high animal fat diet and, 275
industrial agriculture and, 240
inflammation and, 26
“predisease” state and, 263
smaller portions and, 279
stress and, 131, 231
taste receptors in the gut and, 60
oligosaccharides, 207
Omnivor e’s Dilemma, The  (Pollan), 201
optimal health, 260–64, 266
best time to invest in, 271–72
of gut microbiome, 272–85
Oudenhove, Lukas Van, 232
oxytocin, 47, 153, 210
pain, chronic, 4, 8, 26, 35, 68, 80, 81, 131, 182, 184, 248, 263
pain sensitivity , 10, 12, 70, 99, 101, 145, 177
Paleolithic diet, 201
pancreas, 37, 76, 77, 280
panic disorder , 131, 138–39
Panksepp, Jaak, 45
parasites, 57, 85–86, 87, 155, 159, 237
parasympathetic nervous system, 42
Parkinson’ s disease, 8, 16, 22–23, 222, 249–50, 260, 272, 273
changes in gut microbes and, 23, 250, 251
dietary interventions, 251–52
high-fat diet and, 225, 249
industrial agriculture and, 240
Lewy bodies and, 250
peptide YY, 234
peristalsis, 37, 38, 64, 70, 77, 250
Pettersson, Sven, 149
Peyer ’s patches, 62
phytochemical receptors, 59
Plotsky , Paul, 1 14, 1 16, 1 17
Pollan, Michael, 201, 276
polyphenols, 256, 257
postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome, 150–51
prebiotics, 125, 175, 207
predisease state, 262–64
Prevotella, 203, 205, 237, 251, 270
Prilosec, 109
probiotics, 22, 26, 81, 125, 134–35, 142–43, 145, 156, 21 1, 269, 270–71, 277–78
antianxiety ef fects, 142
as antidepressants, 147
in breast milk, 175
clinical trials, 143–44, 147
supplements, 139
who will most benefit, 267
processed foods, 241–49, 276–77, 279
Proteobacteria, 99, 228
psychotropic medications, 134
rabies, 87
Raybould, Helen, 230
Relman, David, 102, 266, 273
Roth, Jesse, 78, 90
Ruminococcus br omii, 215–16
St. Martin, Alexis, 39–40
salmonella, 228
Sapolsky , Robert, 85
satiation, 53, 62, 71, 161, 227
high-fat diet and, 226–27, 230, 234
vagus nerve and, 99, 230
Schapiro, Melvin, 260–61
Scheperjans, Filip, 251
schizophrenia, 127, 279
Schluter , Jonas, 274
Second Brain , The (Gershon), 38, 57
secretin, 77
secretory cells, 92
self-relaxation techniques, 135, 139, 158, 282
serotonin, 12, 23–24, 38, 43, 58, 68–71, 78, 153, 179, 272, 281
ASD and, 156
emotions and, 70–71
in enterochromaf fin cells, 100–101
food poisoning and, 68–69
as gut-brain signaling molecule, 70
probiotics and, 145
Seven Countries Study , 255
Shigella, 124
Singh, Fauja (T urbaned Tornado), 261
sleep, 101
small intestine, 25, 37, 101
duodenum, 66
enteroendocrine cells in, 227, 249
periodic fasting and, 280
smell/nasal olfactory receptors, 60–61
social behavior , 154–59, 180
somatic markers, 181, 183
somatostatin, 77
sorrow , 42, 45, 50
spices, 58, 59
Sternini, Catia, 60
stomach, 25, 36–37, 39, 71, 101
anger and, 64
enteroendocrine cells in, 227
vomiting and, 35, 49
stomach acid, 37, 76, 77
stomach pain, 35, 53
abberant gut reactions and, 32–36
Streptococcus thermophiles, 143
stress, 6, 34, 42, 46, 1 11–27, 267, 272
animal studies, 1 13–20, 124–27
calming hyperactive circuits, 49–50
case histories, 33–36, 150–51
chronic, of factory farm animals, 239
comfort foods and, 230–32
CRF and, 33–35, 34, 86, 1 17
digestion and, 39
early , and hypersensitive gut, 1 16–19
effects on the body , 31
effects on the gut, 46–48, 99, 101
gut infections and, 150
gut microbiota and, 94, 123–25, 148–53, 155, 267, 279
inflammation and, 264
intergenerational transmission of, 1 19–22
leaky gut and, 236
overactive fight-or -flight system, 131
poverty and chronic stress, 1 10
“predisease” state and, 263
during pregnancy , 132
reduction techniques, 134, 135, 139, 158, 282
in the womb, 125–27, 133
stress-related disorders, 1 11–16, 131
strokes, 131, 204
Suez, Jotham, 242, 243
Susruta, 83
sympathetic nervous system, 42
Szyf, Moshe, 120
Tache, Yvette, 34
taste, 57–61, 72
therapies for gut-brain disorders, 133–36, 146
Thinking, Fast and Slow (Kahneman), 165
Tillisch, Kirsten, 21, 143–44, 283
Tissier , Henry , 128–29
Tomiyama, Janet, 231
tongue, 57–58, 59, 72
Toxoplasma gondii , 85–86
Toxoplasma gondii parasite, 237
transducer cells, 58
traveler ’s diarrhea, 151, 152
triglycerides, 229
tryptophan, 69
Turnbaugh, Peter , 212
ulcerative colitis, 20
ulcers, 4, 6, 66, 94
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), 21, 60, 66
vaginal  microbiome, 126–27, 128, 129, 130, 131, 209, 268
vagus nerve, 6, 42, 56, 61, 62, 65–68, 72, 141, 227, 251
high-fat diet and, 230, 232
inflammation and, 99
serotonin and, 69, 100
stimulation as therapy , 68
truncal vagotomy , 66–67, 141
Valium, 141
vegetarian/vegan diet, 204, 213–14, 251
Volkow , Nora, 235
vomiting, 32–36, 48–50, 63, 67, 69, 92, 153, 170, 281
von Economo neurons (VENs), 178
Walsh, John, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79
women’ s intuition, 182–83
World Health Or ganization, 7
Wu, Gary , 213, 215, 217
Xanax, 141
xenobiotics, 95
Yanomami people, 128, 197–202, 206–7, 209, 223, 257
Yatsunenko, Tanya, 202, 205
Yehuda, Rachel, 1 19
yin and yang, 14
yogurt, 143, 145, 21 1, 270–71, 278
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
EMERAN A. MAYER, MD, has studied brain body interactions for the
last forty  years, with a particular emphasis on brain-gut interac tions. He is
the executive director of the Oppenheimer Center for Stress and Resilience
and the codirector of the Digestive Diseases Research Center at the
University of California at Los Angeles. His research has been supported by
the National Institutes of Health for the past twenty-five years, and he is
considered a pioneer and world leader in the areas of brain-gut microbiome
interactions and chronic visceral pain. He has appeared on National Public
Radio (NPR), on PBS, and in the documentary In Search of Balance . His
work has been written about in the Atlantic , Scientific Ameri can, the New
York Times, the Guar dian, among  other publications. He lives in Los
Angeles.
Discover great authors, exclusive of fers, and more at hc.com .

CREDITS
Cover design by Milan Bozic
Cover illustration detail © Barmaleeva/Getty Images
COPYRIGHT
This book contains advice and information relating to health care. It should be used to supplement
rather than replace the advice of your doctor or another trained health professional. If you know or
suspect you have a health problem, it is recommended that you seek your physician ’s advice before
embarking on any medical program or treatment. All efforts have been made to assure the accuracy
of the information contained in this book as of the date of publication. This publisher and the author
disclaim liability for any medical outcom es that may occur as a result of applying the methods
suggested in this book. The names and identifying characteristics of the individuals discussed in this
book have been changed to protect their privacy .
THE MIN D-GUT  CONNECTION . Copyrigh t © 2016 by Dr. Emeran Mayer . All rights reserved
under Inter national and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you
have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decom piled, reverse-
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter inven ted, without the
express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST  EDITION
Illustration by © Barmaleeva/Getty Images
ISBN 978-0-06-237655-8
EPub Edition July 2016 ISBN 9780062376596
16  17  18  19  20    RRD     10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty . Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney , NSW  2000, Australia
www .harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON M4W  1A8, Canada
www .harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www .harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF , UK
www .harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY  10007
www .harpercollins.com
