Why do you like your favorite songs?
Transcriber: Indah Ratnasari
Reviewer: 24 Anh Songs are the soundtrack of our lives. From birthday parties, lullabies, our first love, our first heartbreak, our wedding song, our next wedding song. (Laughter) And ultimately, the song that’s played
at our funeral. Songs enhance the moment or the season. They help us dance. They make us cry. They make us run the extra mile. And they can even make us hate
sitting in traffic just a little bit less. Songs help us remember our lives. They are a time capsule
and a time machine. Imagine you’re riding in your car
next to your partner in your perfectly happy marriage, when all of a sudden that song comes on. That song, you know.
That song from that one summer love. And as your partner is sweetly giving you
a traffic update, you are gone. Evaporated. (Laughter) Evaporated from your heated seat
back to that Greek island. (Laughter) With the sunset lips
of Pericles Constantine Danos, coming in for a kiss. You have been transported by a song that was encoded
in your brain that summer. It’s not your fault. Songs are powerful. Have you ever thought about
what’s in a song? What’s in those 3.5 minutes of
arranged sound that have such impact? We all listen to and turn to songs. I’ve had the privilege of
being someone who writes songs, and as a professor
at the Berklee College of Music, I help other artists write theirs. And there’s tools we use as songwriters
that affect emotion. One of the tools we use is tone. That’s something we all understand: Tone. Imagine you’re sitting
in a cold hospital room waiting to meet your doctor, wearing nothing but your underwear
beneath your dignity gown, and your doctor comes in. Nobody wants to hear, “Hello, my name is Dr. Watson,
and I’m your brain surgeon.” We wanna hear, “Hello. My name is Dr. Watson,
and I am your brain surgeon.” Because when his tone of voice goes up,
so does your heart rate. And when his tone of voice goes down, you feel calm
and like “I’m in good hands.” So tone of voice matters. The next time you go on a first date, you can either say,
“I haven’t been on a date in a while,” (Laughter) Or you can say, “I haven’t been on a date in a while.” (Applause) It matters. It matters. So think of melody
as the song’s tone of voice. How we say what we say is oftentimes
more important than what we say. As Western listeners,
we have a relationship to melody, and we have an expectation
to that relationship. So I’m going to play something,
and when I stop playing, I want you to tell me
what you expect me to play next. (Piano sounds) (Audience singing) There it is. Exactly. (Laughing) So some notes feel stable, and some notes feel more unstable,
begging for resolution. And that’s very powerful information
for a songwriter to know. The words we place on those notes make the listeners feel certain things. I'd like to take a moment
to ruin an Adele song. (Laughter) I’m sure you’ve all heard her song
“Someone Like You.” In the verse and in the pre-chorus, she runs into her ex unexpectedly,
and she’s clearly still in love. And in the chorus, she says,
“Never mind, I’ll find someone like you.” Okay, you know the song. What if it--
What if she had sung it like this? “Never mind, I’ll find someone like you.” What happened?
I apologize, by the way. (Laughter) In my version, we believe her. We believe she will find someone like you. No problem.
There’s plenty of you out there. Because I have paired stable notes
in the key and stable chords, bringing a feeling of stability. But that’s not the melody she sang. Those weren't the tones that she sang. This is her version. “Never mind, I’ll find someone like you.” (Sobbing) (Laughter) Do you feel the difference? So when she sang “never mind,” she sang it on that the most stable note
in the major key. When she sang “find someone,” she sang it on that note that you all wanted me to resolve
back to the home note. “Find someone.” And then she sings “You” on the bittersweet six-degree
of the major scale, breaking your heart. “You...” (Laughter) In her version,
we know she will never find anyone like you. (Laughter) We know that
because she has paired unstable pitches to match the way she’s feeling,
building empathy with the audience. Go, Adele. Another way that songwriters emotionalize
our lyrics is the use of chords. Chords are just three to four notes
played at the same time. Three.
(Piano sounds) Four.
(Piano sounds) And chords have a lot to say
about how our lyrics feel. So, let’s say I want to write a song
about eating a Snickers bar. And let's say that I feel amazing
about eating that Snickers bar, because they just came out with
a fat-free vegan version. (Laughter) I would wanna make sure
that I picked chords that felt as happy
about this news as I do. Today, I ate a Snickers bar. But what if --
What if that wasn’t the case? What if I was despondent or, or -- Very upset about the fact that I’m eating the Snickers bar because
it was my ex’s favorite Snickers bar. It was his favorite candy bar,
and it was the last thing we ate together. (Laughter) Today, I ate a Snickers bar. So chords -- Chords help us define
the mood of the song. Another tool that we use is repetition. Because repetition helps our listeners
remember our song and sing with us. So again, I’m going to play something,
and I want you to be honest. I want you to raise your hand
when you start to get bored. (Laughter) You are the world’s greatest audience. You are the world’s greatest audience. You are the world’s greatest audi -- (Laughter) I’m hurt. No. (Laughter) Exactly, how did we all know that, right? Because in songwriting,
there’s the rule of three. You can’t repeat the same melody
exactly the same way three times in a row. Something’s got to change
at that third time. Maybe I could’ve changed a chord. “You are the world’s greatest audience.” Or maybe the melody. “You are the world’s greatest audience.” So our brains love patterns, but our brains also love surprise. So I set up a pattern. And then I surprised you. And you were re-engaged. But too much repetition
causes the brain to habituate and zone out. Too much repetition is a sonic cliché,
and our listeners stops listening. How many times have you said to your
partner in the same melodic stratosphere? “Honey, pick up your towels.” (Laughter) “Honey, pick up your towels.” Like, after thousands of repetitions. Their brain has habituated
to your wife’s voice. (Laughter) And they don’t hear you. They really don’t. They really don’t. So, try changing your melody in some way. Next time, go,
“Honey, pick up your towels.” (Laughter) Songs help us process emotion
and understand how we feel. When we listen to songs we love, our brain releases
the feel-good-hormone dopamine. When we listen to songs
we don’t like or hate, or hold music, bad hold music, our body releases
the stress hormone cortisol. So, try a little bit of this brain science
for yourself at home. Pick a song in the morning
to start your day with instead of the usual
negative thought train that blazes through your brain,
taking you with it. Put on a song you love
that has uplifting lyrics that primes your nervous system
for a great day. Or the next time you have
questionable in-laws coming over, instead of awkward silences
and small talk, put on a song you know they love,
and let the dopamine flow. I like to start a song with a great title
or a concept or a clear emotion. And then the use of the language. That's a mixture of concrete language,
metaphor and emotion. And then I use all of the musical elements
in support of that idea. As music helps us process
negative emotions as I’ve gotten older, I've had to adopt new nouns
to my vocabulary. Words I never thought would belong to me, like, jowls. (Laughter) (Sigh)
And, turkey neck. (Laughter) And most horrifyingly, crepe skin. (Laughter) So in order to process my rage,
I wrote a song about it. (Cheer and applause) All right. So here’s a little bit. Crepe skin... Oh, I’ve got crepe skin. I’m just getting started. Haven’t figured out the journey. Better than I’ve ever been, but now I’ve got a turkey neck. I’m wearing scarves like Diane Keaton. Turtleneck sweaters in the summer
when it’s heating. Crepe skin. (Applause) I know you don’t relate, but -- (Laughter) Yes, I was able to laugh at -- I was able to laugh at the aging process
and better accept it. And the delivery
of my first AARP magazine. (Laughter) Over a year ago -- Many of you might know this. Over a year ago, I was diagnosed
with breast cancer. And I turned to music for my therapy. In fact, my song was
Lizzo’s “About Damn Time.” Yes. (Cheer and applause) After a double mastectomy,
chemotherapy and going bald, Lizzo’s lyrics
“I’ve been so down and under pressure I may not be the girl I was
or used to be. Bitch, I might be better.” (Laughter) (Cheer and applause) And, and the chorus lyric, “I’ve got
a feeling I’m going to be all right. Okay. It’s about damn time,” became my fight song of optimism
and a shot of dopamine. As there were days that I couldn’t face
the next round of chemo, and I would get a text message
from an old friend, or a card in the mail, or a knock on the door
with a huge bouquet of flowers. And I was filled with love
from those simple kindnesses. And that support and that love
made me face the next treatment. It really made me start to understand
why I loved that old song, “You Are the Wind Beneath My Wings.” Because I literally felt lifted
by the love and the friendship that was surrounding me. Because I shared what I was going through,
which I felt was really important to do. And their love held me
when I couldn’t hold myself. One day, one of my favorite songwriters
texted me and he said, “How are you?” And I said, “It’s gonna take everything
I’ve got to get through this.” And he texted back, “Well, it’s a good thing
you’ve got everything.” But I’m a songwriter. So, that idea -- (Laughter) which he will get no credit for. (Laughing) I held on to that idea because I thought
that’s where those were ideas come to -- Those were ideas come to me from. And one day, my dear friend and artist
Susan Cattaneo came to visit and I said, “I’m ready to start processing
some of this. I’d like to write a song.” And I told her about that idea,
and we sat down. And of course, the first instinct
could have been the minor key because -- (Piano sounds) that’s where we sort of feel
that sadness or darkness belongs. (Piano sounds) But I was feeling a lot more complicated
and complex than that. I was feeling sadness,
but I was feeling fear. But it was all lined with
sunlight and hope because of all my amazing friends
and the community around me. And so we decided to write it
in a major key altering one note. So, it was a blend of darkness and light
from the major key. We got the major
and then altering one note, we sort of got a little bit
of the darkness. In psychology, there’s a term
“name it to tame it”. And when we listen to songs that give name
to how we feel or we write them, we can transmute and metabolize
difficult emotions. And I felt better
on the other side of this song, and I'd like to dedicate it to anyone here
that's facing the hardest thing. (Piano sounds) (Piano sounds) The room in out of focus when I heard that diagnosis. Words I never thought I’d hear. I told my family then my friends as we all tried to pretend that nothing bad ever happened here. But then there were cards and calls
and flowers at my door. I don’t feel so alone anymore. It’s gonna take everything I’ve got.
It’s gonna take everything I’ve got. Everything, to get me through. It’s gonna take everything I’ve got. Everything I’ve got. Everything, to see me through. So it’s a good thing that I’ve got everything. (Piano sounds) (Piano sounds) My head was spinning
with a thousand split decisions, with my fragile faith
and a rose quartz in my hand. But then family, friends and neighbors, the kindness of strangers. When I think that I can’t do this,
they make me think I can. And it’s going to take
everything I’ve got. Everything I’ve got. Everything, to get me through. It’s gonna take everything I’ve got. Everything I've got. Everything to see me through. So it’s a good thing (Piano sounds) that I’ve got everything. (Piano sounds) ’Coz love... Love is a real thing. (Piano sounds) And love... Love is a real thing. And it’s the only thing. And it's everything we've got. It’s everything we’ve got. Everything to get us through. It’s gonna take everything we’ve got. Everything we’ve got. Everything to get us through. So it’s a good thing (Piano sounds) that we’ve got everything. (Piano sounds) (Piano sounds) (Applause) (Applause) 